Thank you so much , Chris . 
And it ' s truly a great honor to have the opportunity to come to this stage twice ; I ' m extremely grateful . 
I have been blown away by this conference , and I want to thank all of you for the many nice comments about what I had to say the other night . 
And I say that sincerely , partly because ( Mock sob ) I need that . 
( Laughter ) Put yourselves in my position . 
( Laughter ) I flew on Air Force Two for eight years . 
( Laughter ) Now I have to take off my shoes or boots to get on an airplane ! 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) I ' ll tell you one quick story to illustrate what that ' s been like for me . 
( Laughter ) It ' s a true story -- every bit of this is true . 
Soon after Tipper and I left the -- ( Mock sob ) White House -- ( Laughter ) we were driving from our home in Nashville to a little farm we have 50 miles east of Nashville . 
Driving ourselves . 
( Laughter ) I know it sounds like a little thing to you , but -- ( Laughter ) I looked in the rear-view mirror and all of a sudden it just hit me . 
There was no motorcade back there . 
( Laughter ) You ' ve heard of phantom limb pain ? 
( Laughter ) This was a rented Ford Taurus . 
( Laughter ) It was dinnertime , and we started looking for a place to eat . 
We were on I-40 . 
We got off the exit , we found a Shoney ' s restaurant . 
Low-cost family restaurant chain , for those of you who don ' t know it . 
We went in and sat down at the booth , and the waitress came over , made a big commotion over Tipper . 
( Laughter ) She took our order , and then went to the couple in the booth next to us , and she lowered her voice so much , I had to really strain to hear what she was saying . 
And she said " Yes , that ' s former Vice President Al Gore and his wife , Tipper. " 
And the man said , " He ' s come down a long way , hasn ' t he ? " 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) There ' s been kind of a series of epiphanies . 
( Laughter ) The very next day , continuing the totally true story , I got on a G-V to fly to Africa to make a speech in Nigeria , in the city of Lagos , on the topic of energy . 
And I began the speech by telling them the story of what had just happened the day before in Nashville . 
And I told it pretty much the same way I ' ve just shared it with you : Tipper and I were driving ourselves , Shoney ' s , low-cost family restaurant chain , what the man said -- they laughed . 
I gave my speech , then went back out to the airport to fly back home . 
I fell asleep on the plane until , during the middle of the night , we landed on the Azores Islands for refueling . 
I woke up , they opened the door , I went out to get some fresh air , and I looked , and there was a man running across the runway . 
And he was waving a piece of paper , and he was yelling , " Call Washington ! Call Washington ! " 
And I thought to myself , in the middle of the night , in the middle of the Atlantic , what in the world could be wrong in Washington ? 
Then I remembered it could be a bunch of things . 
( Laughter ) But what it turned out to be , was that my staff was extremely upset because one of the wire services in Nigeria had already written a story about my speech , and it had already been printed in cities all across the United States of America . 
It was printed in Monterey , I checked . 
( Laughter ) And the story began , " Former Vice President Al Gore announced in Nigeria yesterday , " quote : ' My wife Tipper and I have opened a low-cost family restaurant ' " -- ( Laughter ) " ' named Shoney ' s , and we are running it ourselves. ' " ( Laughter ) Before I could get back to U.S. soil , David Letterman and Jay Leno had already started in on -- one of them had me in a big white chef ' s hat , Tipper was saying , " One more burger with fries ! " 
( Laughter ) Three days later , I got a nice , long , handwritten letter from my friend and partner and colleague Bill Clinton , saying , " Congratulations on the new restaurant , Al ! " 
( Laughter ) We like to celebrate each other ' s successes in life . 
( Laughter ) I was going to talk about information ecology . 
But I was thinking that , since I plan to make a lifelong habit of coming back to TED , that maybe I could talk about that another time . 
( Applause ) Chris Anderson : It ' s a deal ! 
( Applause ) Al Gore : I want to focus on what many of you have said you would like me to elaborate on : What can you do about the climate crisis ? 
I want to start with a couple of -- I ' m going to show some new images , and I ' m going to recapitulate just four or five . 
Now , the slide show . 
I update the slide show every time I give it . 
I add new images , because I learn more about it every time I give it . 
It ' s like beach-combing , you know ? 
Every time the tide comes in and out , you find some more shells . 
Just in the last two days , we got the new temperature records in January . 
This is just for the United States of America . 
Historical average for Januarys is 31 degrees ; last month was 39.5 degrees . 
Now , I know that you wanted some more bad news about the environment -- I ' m kidding . 
But these are the recapitulation slides , and then I ' m going to go into new material about what you can do . 
But I wanted to elaborate on a couple of these . 
First of all , this is where we ' re projected to go with the U.S. contribution to global warming , under business as usual . 
Efficiency in end-use electricity and end-use of all energy is the low-hanging fruit . 
Efficiency and conservation -- it ' s not a cost ; it ' s a profit . 
The sign is wrong . 
It ' s not negative ; it ' s positive . 
These are investments that pay for themselves . 
But they are also very effective in deflecting our path . 
Cars and trucks -- I talked about that in the slideshow , but I want you to put it in perspective . 
It ' s an easy , visible target of concern -- and it should be -- but there is more global warming pollution that comes from buildings than from cars and trucks . 
Cars and trucks are very significant , and we have the lowest standards in the world . 
And so we should address that. But it ' s part of the puzzle . 
Other transportation efficiency is as important as cars and trucks . 
Renewables at the current levels of technological efficiency can make this much difference . 
And with what Vinod , and John Doerr and others , many of you here -- there are a lot of people directly involved in this -- this wedge is going to grow much more rapidly than the current projection shows it . 
Carbon Capture and Sequestration -- that ' s what CCS stands for -- is likely to become the killer app that will enable us to continue to use fossil fuels in a way that is safe . 
Not quite there yet . 
OK. Now , what can you do ? 
Reduce emissions in your home . 
Most of these expenditures are also profitable . 
Insulation , better design . 
I mentioned automobiles -- buy a hybrid . 
Use light rail . 
Figure out some of the other options that are much better . 
It ' s important . 
Be a green consumer . 
You have choices with everything you buy , between things that have a harsh effect , or a much less harsh effect on the global climate crisis . 
Consider this : Make a decision to live a carbon-neutral life . 
Those of you who are good at branding , I ' d love to get your advice and help on how to say this in a way that connects with the most people . 
It is easier than you think . 
It really is . 
A lot of us in here have made that decision , and it is really pretty easy . 
It means reduce your carbon dioxide emissions with the full range of choices that you make , and then purchase or acquire offsets for the remainder that you have not completely reduced . 
And what it means is elaborated at climatecrisis.net . 
There is a carbon calculator . 
Participant Productions convened -- with my active involvement -- the leading software writers in the world , on this arcane science of carbon calculation , to construct a consumer-friendly carbon calculator . 
You can very precisely calculate what your CO2 emissions are , and then you will be given options to reduce . 
And by the time the movie comes out in May , this will be updated to 2.0 , and we will have click-through purchases of offsets . 
Next , consider making your business carbon-neutral . 
Again , some of us have done that , and it ' s not as hard as you think . 
Integrate climate solutions into all of your innovations , whether you are from the technology , or entertainment , or design and architecture community . 
Invest sustainably . 
Majora mentioned this . 
Listen , if you have invested money with managers who you compensate on the basis of their annual performance , don ' t ever again complain about quarterly report CEO management . 
Over time , people do what you pay them to do . 
And if they judge how much they ' re going to get paid on your capital that they ' ve invested , based on the short-term returns , you ' re going to get short-term decisions . 
A lot more to be said about that . 
Become a catalyst of change . 
Teach others , learn about it , talk about it . 
The movie is a movie version of the slideshow I gave two nights ago , except it ' s a lot more entertaining . 
And it comes out in May . 
Many of you here have the opportunity to ensure that a lot of people see it . 
Consider sending somebody to Nashville . 
Pick well . 
And I am personally going to train people to give this slideshow -- re-purposed , with some of the personal stories obviously replaced with a generic approach , and it ' s not just the slides , it ' s what they mean . 
And it ' s how they link together . 
And so I ' m going to be conducting a course this summer for a group of people that are nominated by different folks to come and then give it en masse , in communities all across the country , and we ' re going to update the slideshow for all of them every single week , to keep it right on the cutting edge . 
Working with Larry Lessig , it will be , somewhere in that process , posted with tools and limited-use copyrights , so that young people can remix it and do it in their own way . 
( Applause ) Where did anybody get the idea that you ought to stay arm ' s length from politics ? 
We need Republicans as well . 
This used to be a bipartisan issue , and I know that in this group it really is . 
Make our democracy work the way it ' s supposed to work . 
Support the idea of capping carbon dioxide emissions -- global warming pollution -- and trading it . 
Here ' s why : as long as the United States is out of the world system , it ' s not a closed system . 
Once it becomes a closed system , with U.S. participation , then everybody who ' s on a board of directors -- how many people here serve on the board of directors of a corporation ? 
Once it ' s a closed system , you will have legal liability if you do not urge your CEO to get the maximum income from reducing and trading the carbon emissions that can be avoided . 
The market will work to solve this problem -- if we can accomplish this . 
Help with the mass persuasion campaign that will start this spring . 
We have to change the minds of the American people . 
Because presently , the politicians do not have permission to do what needs to be done . 
And in our modern country , the role of logic and reason no longer includes mediating between wealth and power the way it once did . 
It ' s now repetition of short , hot-button , 30-second , 28-second television ads . 
We have to buy a lot of those ads . 
Let ' s re-brand global warming , as many of you have suggested . 
I like " climate crisis " instead of " climate collapse , " but again , those of you who are good at branding , I need your help on this . 
Somebody said the test we ' re facing now , a scientist told me , is whether the combination of an opposable thumb and a neocortex is a viable combination . 
( Laughter ) That ' s really true . 
Again , the Republicans here -- this shouldn ' t be partisan . 
You have more influence than some of us who are Democrats do . 
This is an opportunity . 
Not just this , but connected to the ideas that are here , to bring more coherence to them . 
We are one . 
Thank you very much , I appreciate it . 
With all the legitimate concerns about AIDS and avian flu -- and we ' ll hear about that from the brilliant Dr. Brilliant later today -- I want to talk about the other pandemic , which is cardiovascular disease , diabetes , hypertension -- all of which are completely preventable for at least 95 percent of people just by changing diet and lifestyle . 
And what ' s happening is that there ' s a globalization of illness occurring , that people are starting to eat like us , and live like us , and die like us. And in one generation , for example , Asia ' s gone from having one of the lowest rates of heart disease and obesity and diabetes to one of the highest. And in Africa , cardiovascular disease equals the HIV and AIDS deaths in most countries . 
So there ' s a critical window of opportunity we have to make an important difference that can affect the lives of literally millions of people , and practice preventive medicine on a global scale . 
Heart and blood vessel diseases still kill more people -- not only in this country , but also worldwide -- than everything else combined , and yet it ' s completely preventable for almost everybody . 
It ' s not only preventable ; it ' s actually reversible. And for the last almost 29 years , we ' ve been able to show that by simply changing diet and lifestyle , using these very high-tech , expensive , state-of-the-art measures to prove how powerful these very simple and low-tech and low-cost interventions can be like -- quantitative arteriography , before and after a year , and cardiac PET scans . 
We showed a few months ago -- we published the first study showing you can actually stop or reverse the progression of prostate cancer by making changes in diet and lifestyle , and 70 percent regression in the tumor growth , or inhibition of the tumor growth , compared to only nine percent in the control group . 
And in the MRI and MR spectroscopy here , the prostate tumor activity is shown in red -- you can see it diminishing after a year . 
Now there is an epidemic of obesity : two-thirds of adults and 15 percent of kids. What ' s really concerning to me is that diabetes has increased 70 percent in the past 10 years , and this may be the first generation in which our kids live a shorter life span than we do. That ' s pitiful , and it ' s preventable . 
Now these are not election returns , these are the people -- the number of the people who are obese by state , beginning in ' 85 , ' 86 , ' 87 -- these are from the CDC website -- ' 88 , ' 89 , ' 90 , ' 91 -- you get a new category -- ' 92 , ' 93 , ' 94 , ' 95 , ' 96 , ' 97 , ' 98 , ' 99 , 2000 , 2001 -- it gets worse. We ' re kind of devolving. ( Laughter ) Now what can we do about this ? Well , you know , the diet that we ' ve found that can reverse heart disease and cancer is an Asian diet . 
But the people in Asia are starting to eat like we are , which is why they ' re starting to get sick like we are . 
So I ' ve been working with a lot of the big food companies. They can make it fun and sexy and hip and crunchy and convenient to eat healthier foods , like -- I chair the advisory boards to McDonald ' s , and PepsiCo , and ConAgra , and Safeway , and soon Del Monte , and they ' re finding that it ' s good business . 
The salads that you see at McDonald ' s came from the work -- they ' re going to have an Asian salad. At Pepsi , two-thirds of their revenue growth came from their better foods . 
And so if we can do that , then we can free up resources for buying drugs that you really do need for treating AIDS and HIV and malaria and for preventing avian flu. Thank you . 
Well , there ' s lots to talk about , but I think I ' m just going to play to start off . 
( Music ) ♫ When I wake up ♫ ♫ in the morning ♫ ♫ I pour the coffee ♫ ♫ I read the paper ♫ ♫ And then I slowly ♫ ♫ and so softly ♫ ♫ do the dishes ♫ ♫ So feed the fishes ♫ ♫ You sing me happy birthday ♫ ♫ Like it ' s gonna be ♫ ♫ your last day ♫ ♫ here on Earth ♫ ( Applause ) All right . 
So , I wanted to do something special today . 
I want to debut a new song that I ' ve been working on in the last five or six months . 
And there ' s few things more thrilling than playing a song for the first time in front of an audience , especially when it ' s half-finished . 
( Laughter ) I ' m kind of hoping some conversations here might help me finish it . 
Because it gets into all sorts of crazy realms . 
And so this is basically a song about loops , but not the kind of loops that I make up here . 
They ' re feedback loops . 
And in the audio world that ' s when the microphone gets too close to its sound source , and then it gets in this self-destructive loop that creates a very unpleasant sound . 
And I ' m going to demonstrate for you . 
( Laughter ) I ' m not going to hurt you. Don ' t worry . 
♫ This is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a loop , feedback loop ♫ ♫ This is a -- ( Feedback ) All right. I don ' t know if that was necessary to demonstrate -- ( Laughter ) -- but my point is it ' s the sound of self-destruction . 
And I ' ve been thinking about how that applies across a whole spectrum of realms , from , say , the ecological , okay . 
There seems to be a rule in nature that if you get too close to where you came from , it gets ugly . 
So like , you can ' t feed cows their own brains or you get mad cow disease , and inbreeding and incest and , let ' s see , what ' s the other one ? 
Biological -- there ' s autoimmune diseases , where the body attacks itself a little too overzealously and destroys the host , or the person . 
And then -- okay , this is where we get to the song -- kind of bridges the gap to the emotional . 
Because although I ' ve used scientific terms in songs , it ' s very difficult sometimes to make them lyrical . 
And there ' s some things you just don ' t need to have in songs . 
So I ' m trying to bridge this gap between this idea and this melody . 
And so , I don ' t know if you ' ve ever had this , but when I close my eyes sometimes and try to sleep , I can ' t stop thinking about my own eyes . 
And it ' s like your eyes start straining to see themselves . 
That ' s what it feels like to me . 
It ' s not pleasant . 
I ' m sorry if I put that idea in your head . 
( Laughter ) It ' s impossible , of course , for your eyes to see themselves , but they seem to be trying . 
So that ' s getting a little more closer to a personal experience . 
Or ears being able to hear themselves -- it ' s just impossible . 
That ' s the thing . 
So , I ' ve been working on this song that mentions these things and then also imagines a person who ' s been so successful at defending themselves from heartbreak that they ' re left to do the deed themselves , if that ' s possible . 
And that ' s what the song is asking . 
All right . 
It doesn ' t have a name yet . 
( Music ) ♫ Go ahead and congratulate yourself ♫ ♫ Give yourself a hand , the hand is your hand ♫ ♫ And the eye that eyes itself is your eye ♫ ♫ And the ear that hears itself is near ♫ ♫ ' Cause it ' s your ear , oh oh ♫ ♫ You ' ve done the impossible now ♫ ♫ Took yourself apart ♫ ♫ You made yourself invulnerable ♫ ♫ No one can break your heart ♫ ♫ So you wear it out ♫ ♫ And you wring it out ♫ ♫ And you wear it out ♫ ♫ And you break it yourself ♫ ♫ Breaking your own , break it yourself ♫ ♫ Breaking your own , break it yourself ♫ ♫ Breaking your own ♫ ( Applause ) Thanks . 
( Applause ) All right . 
It ' s kind of cool. Songwriters can sort of get away with murder . 
You can throw out crazy theories and not have to back it up with data or graphs or research . 
But , you know , I think reckless curiosity would be what the world needs now , just a little bit . 
( Applause ) I ' m going to finish up with a song of mine called " Weather Systems. " 
( Music ) ♫ Quiet ♫ ♫ Quiet down , she said ♫ ♫ Speak into the back of his head ♫ ♫ On the edge of the bed , I can see your blood flow ♫ ♫ I can see your ♫ ♫ cells grow ♫ ♫ Hold still awhile ♫ ♫ Don ' t spill the wine ♫ ♫ I can see it all from here ♫ ♫ I can see ♫ ♫ oh , I ♫ ♫ I can see ♫ ♫ weather systems ♫ ♫ of the world ♫ ♫ Weather systems ♫ ♫ of the world ♫ ♫ Some things you say ♫ ♫ are not for sale ♫ ♫ I would hold it where ♫ ♫ our free agents of some substance are ♫ ♫ scared ♫ ♫ Hold still a while ♫ ♫ Don ' t spill the wine ♫ ♫ I can see it all from here ♫ ♫ I can see ♫ ♫ oh , I ♫ ♫ I can see ♫ ♫ weather systems of the world ♫ ♫ Weather systems ♫ ♫ of the world ♫ Thanks . 
What if I told you there was something that you can do right now that would have an immediate , positive benefit for your brain including your mood and your focus ? 
And what if I told you that same thing could actually last a long time and protect your brain from different conditions like depression , Alzheimer ' s disease or dementia . 
Would you do it ? 
Yes ! 
I am talking about the powerful effects of physical activity . 
Simply moving your body , has immediate , long-lasting and protective benefits for your brain . 
And that can last for the rest of your life . 
So what I want to do today is tell you a story about how I used my deep understanding of neuroscience , as a professor of neuroscience , to essentially do an experiment on myself in which I discovered the science underlying why exercise is the most transformative thing that you can do for your brain today . 
Now , as a neuroscientist , I know that our brains , that is the thing in our head right now , that is the most complex structure known to humankind . 
But it ' s one thing to talk about the brain , and it ' s another to see it . 
So here is a real preserved human brain . 
And it ' s going to illustrate two key areas that we are going to talk about today . 
The first is the prefrontal cortex , right behind your forehead , critical for things like decision-making , focus , attention and your personality . 
The second key area is located in the temporal lobe , shown right here . 
You have two temporal lobes in your brain , the right and the left , and deep in the temporal lobe is a key structure critical for your ability to form and retain new long-term memories for facts and events . 
And that structure is called the hippocampus . 
So I ' ve always been fascinated with the hippocampus . 
How could it be that an event that lasts just a moment , say , your first kiss , or the moment your first child was born , can form a memory that has changed your brain , that lasts an entire lifetime ? 
That ' s what I want to understand . 
I wanted to start and record the activity of individual brain cells in the hippocampus as subjects were forming new memories . 
And essentially try and decode how those brief bursts of electrical activity , which is how neurons communicate with each other , how those brief bursts either allowed us to form a new memory , or did not . 
But a few years ago , I did something very unusual in science . 
As a full professor of neural science , I decided to completely switch my research program . 
Because I encountered something that was so amazing , with the potential to change so many lives that I had to study it . 
I discovered and I experienced the brain-changing effects of exercise . 
And I did it in a completely inadvertent way . 
I was actually at the height of all the memory work that I was doing -- data was pouring in , I was becoming known in my field for all of this memory work . 
And it should have been going great. It was , scientifically . 
But when I stuck my head out of my lab door , I noticed something . 
I had no social life . 
I spent too much time listening to those brain cells in a dark room , by myself . 
( Laughter ) I didn ' t move my body at all . 
I had gained 25 pounds . 
And actually , it took me many years to realize it , I was actually miserable . 
And I shouldn ' t be miserable . 
And I went on a river-rafting trip -- by myself , because I had no social life . 
And I came back -- ( Laughter ) thinking , " Oh , my God , I was the weakest person on that trip. " 
And I came back with a mission . 
I said , " I ' m never going to feel like the weakest person on a river-rafting trip again. " 
And that ' s what made me go to the gym . 
And I focused my type-A personality on going to all the exercise classes at the gym . 
I tried everything . 
I went to kickbox , dance , yoga , step class , and at first it was really hard . 
But what I noticed is that after every sweat-inducing workout that I tried , I had this great mood boost and this great energy boost . 
And that ' s what kept me going back to the gym . 
Well , I started feeling stronger . 
I started feeling better , I even lost that 25 pounds . 
And now , fast-forward a year and a half into this regular exercise program and I noticed something that really made me sit up and take notice . 
I was sitting at my desk , writing a research grant , and a thought went through my mind that had never gone through my mind before . 
And that thought was , " Gee , grant-writing is going well today. " 
And all the scientists -- ( Laughter ) yeah , all the scientists always laugh when I say that , because grant-writing never goes well . 
It is so hard ; you ' re always pulling your hair out , trying to come up with that million-dollar-winning idea . 
But I realized that the grant-writing was going well , because I was able to focus and maintain my attention for longer than I had before . 
And my long-term memory -- what I was studying in my own lab -- seemed to be better in me . 
And that ' s when I put it together . 
Maybe all that exercise that I had included and added to my life was changing my brain . 
Maybe I did an experiment on myself without even knowing it . 
So as a curious neuroscientist , I went to the literature to see what I could find about what we knew about the effects of exercise on the brain . 
And what I found was an exciting and a growing literature that was essentially showing everything that I noticed in myself . 
Better mood , better energy , better memory , better attention . 
And the more I learned , the more I realized how powerful exercise was . 
Which eventually led me to the big decision to completely shift my research focus . 
And so now , after several years of really focusing on this question , I ' ve come to the following conclusion : that exercise is the most transformative thing that you can do for your brain today for the following three reasons . 
Number one : it has immediate effects on your brain . 
A single workout that you do will immediately increase levels of neurotransmitters like dopamine , serotonin and noradrenaline . 
That is going to increase your mood right after that workout , exactly what I was feeling . 
My lab showed that a single workout can improve your ability to shift and focus attention , and that focus improvement will last for at least two hours . 
And finally , studies have shown that a single workout will improve your reaction times which basically means that you are going to be faster at catching that cup of Starbucks that falls off the counter , which is very , very important . 
( Laughter ) But these immediate effects are transient , they help you right after . 
What you have to do is do what I did , that is change your exercise regime , increase your cardiorespiratory function , to get the long-lasting effects . 
And these effects are long-lasting because exercise actually changes the brain ' s anatomy , physiology and function . 
Let ' s start with my favorite brain area , the hippocampus . 
The hippocampus -- or exercise actually produces brand new brain cells , new brain cells in the hippocampus , that actually increase its volume , as well as improve your long-term memory , OK ? 
And that including in you and me . 
Number two : the most common finding in neuroscience studies , looking at effects of long-term exercise , is improved attention function dependent on your prefrontal cortex . 
You not only get better focus and attention , but the volume of the hippocampus increases as well . 
And finally , you not only get immediate effects of mood with exercise but those last for a long time . 
So you get long-lasting increases in those good mood neurotransmitters . 
But really , the most transformative thing that exercise will do is its protective effects on your brain . 
Here you can think about the brain like a muscle . 
The more you ' re working out , the bigger and stronger your hippocampus and prefrontal cortex gets . 
Why is that important ? 
Because the prefrontal cortex and the hippocampus are the two areas that are most susceptible to neurodegenerative diseases and normal cognitive decline in aging . 
So with increased exercise over your lifetime , you ' re not going to cure dementia or Alzheimer ' s disease , but what you ' re going to do is you ' re going to create the strongest , biggest hippocampus and prefrontal cortex so it takes longer for these diseases to actually have an effect . 
You can think of exercise , therefore , as a supercharged 401K for your brain , OK ? 
And it ' s even better , because it ' s free . 
So this is the point in the talk where everybody says , " That sounds so interesting , Wendy , but I really will only want to know one thing . 
And that is , just tell me the minimum amount of exercise I need to get all these changes. " 
( Laughter ) And so I ' m going to tell you the answer to that question . 
First , good news : you don ' t have to become a triathlete to get these effects . 
The rule of thumb is you want to get three to four times a week exercise minimum 30 minutes an exercise session , and you want to get aerobic exercise in . 
That is , get your heart rate up . 
And the good news is , you don ' t have to go to the gym to get a very expensive gym membership . 
Add an extra walk around the block in your power walk . 
You see stairs -- take stairs . 
And power-vacuuming can be as good as the aerobics class that you were going to take at the gym . 
So I ' ve gone from memory pioneer to exercise explorer . 
From going into the innermost workings of the brain , to trying to understand how exercise can improve our brain function , and my goal in my lab right now is to go beyond that rule of thumb that I just gave you -- three to four times a week , 30 minutes . 
I want to understand the optimum exercise prescription for you , at your age , at your fitness level , for your genetic background , to maximize the effects of exercise today and also to improve your brain and protect your brain the best for the rest of your life . 
But it ' s one thing to talk about exercise , and it ' s another to do it . 
So I ' m going to invoke my power as a certified exercise instructor , to ask you all to stand up . 
( Laughter ) We ' re going to do just one minute of exercise . 
It ' s call-and-response , just do what I do , say what I say , and make sure you don ' t punch your neighbor , OK ? 
Music ! 
( Upbeat music ) Five , six , seven , eight , it ' s right , left , right , left . 
And I say , I am strong now . 
Let ' s hear you . 
Audience : I am strong now . 
Wendy Suzuki : Ladies , I am Wonder Woman-strong . 
Let ' s hear you ! 
Audience : I am Wonder Woman-strong . 
WS : New move -- uppercut , right and left . 
I am inspired now. You say it ! 
Audience : I am inspired now . 
WS : Last move -- pull it down , right and left , right and left . 
I say , I am on fire now ! You say it . 
Audience : I am on fire now . 
WS : And done ! OK , good job ! 
I want to leave you with one last thought . 
And that is , bringing exercise in your life will not only give you a happier , more protective life today , but it will protect your brain from incurable diseases . 
And in this way it will change the trajectory of your life for the better . 
So for any of us in this room today , let ' s start out by admitting we ' re lucky . 
We don ' t live in the world our mothers lived in , our grandmothers lived in , where career choices for women were so limited . 
And if you ' re in this room today , most of us grew up in a world where we have basic civil rights , and amazingly , we still live in a world where some women don ' t have them . 
But all that aside , we still have a problem , and it ' s a real problem . 
And the problem is this : Women are not making it to the top of any profession anywhere in the world . 
The numbers tell the story quite clearly . 
190 heads of state -- nine are women . 
Of all the people in parliament in the world , 13 percent are women . 
In the corporate sector , women at the top , C-level jobs , board seats -- tops out at 15 , 16 percent . 
The numbers have not moved since 2002 and are going in the wrong direction . 
And even in the non-profit world , a world we sometimes think of as being led by more women , women at the top : 20 percent . 
We also have another problem , which is that women face harder choices between professional success and personal fulfillment . 
A recent study in the U.S. showed that , of married senior managers , two-thirds of the married men had children and only one-third of the married women had children . 
A couple of years ago , I was in New York , and I was pitching a deal , and I was in one of those fancy New York private equity offices you can picture . 
And I ' m in the meeting -- it ' s about a three-hour meeting -- and two hours in , there needs to be that bio break , and everyone stands up , and the partner running the meeting starts looking really embarrassed . 
And I realized he doesn ' t know where the women ' s room is in his office . 
So I start looking around for moving boxes , figuring they just moved in , but I don ' t see any . 
And so I said , " Did you just move into this office ? " 
And he said , " No , we ' ve been here about a year. " 
And I said , " Are you telling me that I am the only woman to have pitched a deal in this office in a year ? " 
And he looked at me , and he said , " Yeah. Or maybe you ' re the only one who had to go to the bathroom. " 
( Laughter ) So the question is , how are we going to fix this ? 
How do we change these numbers at the top ? 
How do we make this different ? 
I want to start out by saying , I talk about this -- about keeping women in the workforce -- because I really think that ' s the answer . 
In the high-income part of our workforce , in the people who end up at the top -- Fortune 500 CEO jobs , or the equivalent in other industries -- the problem , I am convinced , is that women are dropping out . 
Now people talk about this a lot , and they talk about things like flextime and mentoring and programs companies should have to train women . 
I want to talk about none of that today , even though that ' s all really important . 
Today I want to focus on what we can do as individuals . 
What are the messages we need to tell ourselves ? 
What are the messages we tell the women that work with and for us ? 
What are the messages we tell our daughters ? 
Now , at the outset , I want to be very clear that this speech comes with no judgments . 
I don ' t have the right answer . 
I don ' t even have it for myself . 
I left San Francisco , where I live , on Monday , and I was getting on the plane for this conference . 
And my daughter , who ' s three , when I dropped her off at preschool , did that whole hugging-the-leg , crying , " Mommy , don ' t get on the plane " thing . 
This is hard. I feel guilty sometimes . 
I know no women , whether they ' re at home or whether they ' re in the workforce , who don ' t feel that sometimes . 
So I ' m not saying that staying in the workforce is the right thing for everyone . 
My talk today is about what the messages are if you do want to stay in the workforce , and I think there are three . 
One , sit at the table . 
Two , make your partner a real partner . 
And three , don ' t leave before you leave . 
Number one : sit at the table . 
Just a couple weeks ago at Facebook , we hosted a very senior government official , and he came in to meet with senior execs from around Silicon Valley . 
And everyone kind of sat at the table . 
He had these two women who were traveling with him pretty senior in his department , and I kind of said to them , " Sit at the table. Come on , sit at the table , " and they sat on the side of the room . 
When I was in college , my senior year , I took a course called European Intellectual History . 
Don ' t you love that kind of thing from college ? 
I wish I could do that now . 
And I took it with my roommate , Carrie , who was then a brilliant literary student -- and went on to be a brilliant literary scholar -- and my brother -- smart guy , but a water-polo-playing pre-med , who was a sophomore . 
The three of us take this class together . 
And then Carrie reads all the books in the original Greek and Latin , goes to all the lectures . 
I read all the books in English and go to most of the lectures . 
My brother is kind of busy . 
He reads one book of 12 and goes to a couple of lectures , marches himself up to our room a couple days before the exam to get himself tutored . 
The three of us go to the exam together , and we sit down . 
And we sit there for three hours -- and our little blue notebooks -- yes , I ' m that old . 
We walk out , we look at each other , and we say , " How did you do ? " 
And Carrie says , " Boy , I feel like I didn ' t really draw out the main point on the Hegelian dialectic. " 
And I say , " God , I really wish I had really connected John Locke ' s theory of property with the philosophers that follow. " 
And my brother says , " I got the top grade in the class. " 
( Laughter ) " You got the top grade in the class ? 
You don ' t know anything. " 
( Laughter ) The problem with these stories is that they show what the data shows : women systematically underestimate their own abilities . 
If you test men and women , and you ask them questions on totally objective criteria like GPAs , men get it wrong slightly high , and women get it wrong slightly low . 
Women do not negotiate for themselves in the workforce . 
A study in the last two years of people entering the workforce out of college showed that 57 percent of boys entering , or men , I guess , are negotiating their first salary , and only seven percent of women . 
And most importantly , men attribute their success to themselves , and women attribute it to other external factors . 
If you ask men why they did a good job , they ' ll say , " I ' m awesome . 
Obviously. Why are you even asking ? " 
If you ask women why they did a good job , what they ' ll say is someone helped them , they got lucky , they worked really hard . 
Boy , it matters a lot . 
Because no one gets to the corner office by sitting on the side , not at the table , and no one gets the promotion if they don ' t think they deserve their success , or they don ' t even understand their own success . 
I wish the answer were easy . 
I wish I could go tell all the young women I work for , these fabulous women , " Believe in yourself and negotiate for yourself . 
Own your own success. " 
I wish I could tell that to my daughter . 
But it ' s not that simple . 
Because what the data shows , above all else , is one thing , which is that success and likeability are positively correlated for men and negatively correlated for women . 
And everyone ' s nodding , because we all know this to be true . 
There ' s a really good study that shows this really well . 
There ' s a famous Harvard Business School study on a woman named Heidi Roizen . 
And she ' s an operator in a company in Silicon Valley , and she uses her contacts to become a very successful venture capitalist . 
In 2002 -- not so long ago -- a professor who was then at Columbia University took that case and made it [ Howard ] Roizen . 
And he gave the case out , both of them , to two groups of students . 
He changed exactly one word : " Heidi " to " Howard. " 
But that one word made a really big difference . 
He then surveyed the students , and the good news was the students , both men and women , thought Heidi and Howard were equally competent , and that ' s good . 
The bad news was that everyone liked Howard . 
He ' s a great guy. You want to work for him . 
You want to spend the day fishing with him . 
But Heidi ? Not so sure . 
She ' s a little out for herself. She ' s a little political . 
You ' re not sure you ' d want to work for her . 
This is the complication . 
We have to tell our daughters and our colleagues , we have to tell ourselves to believe we got the A , to reach for the promotion , to sit at the table , and we have to do it in a world where , for them , there are sacrifices they will make for that , even though for their brothers , there are not . 
The saddest thing about all of this is that it ' s really hard to remember this . 
And I ' m about to tell a story which is truly embarrassing for me , but I think important . 
I gave this talk at Facebook not so long ago to about 100 employees , and a couple hours later , there was a young woman who works there sitting outside my little desk , and she wanted to talk to me . 
I said , okay , and she sat down , and we talked . 
And she said , " I learned something today . 
I learned that I need to keep my hand up. " 
She said , " You ' re giving this talk , and you said you would take two more questions . 
I had my hand up with many other people , and you took two more questions . 
I put my hand down , and I noticed all the women did the same , and then you took more questions , only from the men. " 
And I thought to myself , " Wow , if it ' s me -- who cares about this , obviously -- giving this talk -- and during this talk , I can ' t even notice that the men ' s hands are still raised , and the women ' s hands are still raised , how good are we as managers of our companies and our organizations at seeing that the men are reaching for opportunities more than women ? " 
We ' ve got to get women to sit at the table . 
( Cheers ) ( Applause ) Message number two : Make your partner a real partner . 
I ' ve become convinced that we ' ve made more progress in the workforce than we have in the home . 
The data shows this very clearly . 
If a woman and a man work full-time and have a child , the woman does twice the amount of housework the man does , and the woman does three times the amount of childcare the man does . 
So she ' s got three jobs or two jobs , and he ' s got one . 
Who do you think drops out when someone needs to be home more ? 
The causes of this are really complicated , and I don ' t have time to go into them . 
And I don ' t think Sunday football-watching and general laziness is the cause . 
I think the cause is more complicated . 
I think , as a society , we put more pressure on our boys to succeed than we do on our girls . 
I know men that stay home and work in the home to support wives with careers , and it ' s hard . 
When I go to the Mommy-and-Me stuff and I see the father there , I notice that the other mommies don ' t play with him . 
And that ' s a problem , because we have to make it as important a job , because it ' s the hardest job in the world to work inside the home , for people of both genders , if we ' re going to even things out and let women stay in the workforce . 
( Applause ) Studies show that households with equal earning and equal responsibility also have half the divorce rate . 
And if that wasn ' t good enough motivation for everyone out there , they also have more -- how shall I say this on this stage ? 
They know each other more in the biblical sense as well . 
( Cheers ) Message number three : Don ' t leave before you leave . 
I think there ' s a really deep irony to the fact that actions women are taking -- and I see this all the time -- with the objective of staying in the workforce actually lead to their eventually leaving . 
Here ' s what happens : We ' re all busy. Everyone ' s busy. A woman ' s busy . 
And she starts thinking about having a child , and from the moment she starts thinking about having a child , she starts thinking about making room for that child . 
" How am I going to fit this into everything else I ' m doing ? " 
And literally from that moment , she doesn ' t raise her hand anymore , she doesn ' t look for a promotion , she doesn ' t take on the new project , she doesn ' t say , " Me. I want to do that. " 
She starts leaning back . 
The problem is that -- let ' s say she got pregnant that day , that day -- nine months of pregnancy , three months of maternity leave , six months to catch your breath -- Fast-forward two years , more often -- and as I ' ve seen it -- women start thinking about this way earlier -- when they get engaged , or married , when they start thinking about having a child , which can take a long time . 
She looked a little young . 
And I said , " So are you and your husband thinking about having a baby ? " 
And she said , " Oh no , I ' m not married. " 
She didn ' t even have a boyfriend . 
( Laughter ) I said , " You ' re thinking about this just way too early. " 
But the point is that what happens once you start kind of quietly leaning back ? 
Everyone who ' s been through this -- and I ' m here to tell you , once you have a child at home , your job better be really good to go back , because it ' s hard to leave that kid at home . 
Your job needs to be challenging . 
You need to feel like you ' re making a difference . 
And if two years ago you didn ' t take a promotion and some guy next to you did , if three years ago you stopped looking for new opportunities , you ' re going to be bored because you should have kept your foot on the gas pedal . 
Don ' t leave before you leave . 
Stay in . 
Keep your foot on the gas pedal , until the very day you need to leave to take a break for a child -- and then make your decisions . 
Don ' t make decisions too far in advance , particularly ones you ' re not even conscious you ' re making . 
My generation really , sadly , is not going to change the numbers at the top . 
They ' re just not moving . 
We are not going to get to where 50 percent of the population -- in my generation , there will not be 50 percent of [ women ] at the top of any industry . 
But I ' m hopeful that future generations can . 
I think a world where half of our countries and our companies were run by women , would be a better world . 
It ' s not just because people would know where the women ' s bathrooms are , even though that would be very helpful . 
I think it would be a better world . 
I have two children . 
I want my son to have a choice to contribute fully in the workforce or at home , and I want my daughter to have the choice to not just succeed , but to be liked for her accomplishments . 
I would like to tell you all that you are all actually cyborgs , but not the cyborgs that you think . 
You ' re not RoboCop , and you ' re not Terminator , but you ' re cyborgs every time you look at a computer screen or use one of your cell phone devices . 
So what ' s a good definition for cyborg ? 
Well , traditional definition is " an organism to which exogenous components have been added for the purpose of adapting to new environments. " 
That came from a 1960 paper on space travel , because , if you think about it , space is pretty awkward . 
People aren ' t supposed to be there . 
But humans are curious , and they like to add things to their bodies so they can go to the Alps one day and then become a fish in the sea the next . 
So let ' s look at the concept of traditional anthropology . 
Somebody goes to another country , says , " How fascinating these people are , how interesting their tools are , how curious their culture is. " 
And then they write a paper , and maybe a few other anthropologists read it , and we think it ' s very exotic . 
Well , what ' s happening is that we ' ve suddenly found a new species . 
I , as a cyborg anthropologist , have suddenly said , " Oh , wow. Now suddenly we ' re a new form of Homo sapiens , and look at these fascinating cultures , and look at these curious rituals that everybody ' s doing around this technology . 
They ' re clicking on things and staring at screens. " 
Now there ' s a reason why I study this , versus traditional anthropology . 
And the reason is that tool use , in the beginning -- for thousands and thousands of years , everything has been a physical modification of self . 
It has helped us to extend our physical selves , go faster , hit things harder , and there ' s been a limit on that . 
But now what we ' re looking at is not an extension of the physical self , but an extension of the mental self , and because of that , we ' re able to travel faster , communicate differently . 
And the other thing that happens is that we ' re all carrying around little Mary Poppins technology . 
We can put anything we want into it , and it doesn ' t get heavier , and then we can take anything out . 
What does the inside of your computer actually look like ? 
Well , if you print it out , it looks like a thousand pounds of material that you ' re carrying around all the time . 
And if you actually lose that information , it means that you suddenly have this loss in your mind , that you suddenly feel like something ' s missing , except you aren ' t able to see it , so it feels like a very strange emotion . 
The other thing that happens is that you have a second self . 
Whether you like it or not , you ' re starting to show up online , and people are interacting with your second self when you ' re not there . 
And so you have to be careful about leaving your front lawn open , which is basically your Facebook wall , so that people don ' t write on it in the middle of the night -- because it ' s very much the equivalent . 
And suddenly we have to start to maintain our second self . 
You have to present yourself in digital life in a similar way that you would in your analog life . 
So , in the same way that you wake up , take a shower and get dressed , you have to learn to do that for your digital self . 
And the problem is that a lot of people now , especially adolescents , have to go through two adolescences . 
They have to go through their primary one , that ' s already awkward , and then they go through their second self ' s adolescence , and that ' s even more awkward because there ' s an actual history of what they ' ve gone through online . 
And anybody coming in new to technology is an adolescent online right now , and so it ' s very awkward , and it ' s very difficult for them to do those things . 
So when I was little , my dad would sit me down at night and he would say , " I ' m going to teach you about time and space in the future. " 
And I said , " Great. " 
And he said one day , " What ' s the shortest distance between two points ? " 
And I said , " Well , that ' s a straight line. You told me that yesterday. " 
I thought I was very clever . 
He said , " No , no , no. Here ' s a better way. " 
He took a piece of paper , drew A and B on one side and the other and folded them together so where A and B touched . 
And he said , " That is the shortest distance between two points. " 
And I said , " Dad , dad , dad , how do you do that ? " 
He said , " Well , you just bend time and space , it takes an awful lot of energy , and that ' s just how you do it. " 
And I said , " I want to do that. " 
And he said , " Well , okay. " 
And so , when I went to sleep for the next 10 or 20 years , I was thinking at night , " I want to be the first person to create a wormhole , to make things accelerate faster . 
And I want to make a time machine. " 
I was always sending messages to my future self using tape recorders . 
But then what I realized when I went to college is that technology doesn ' t just get adopted because it works . 
It gets adopted because people use it and it ' s made for humans . 
So I started studying anthropology . 
And when I was writing my thesis on cell phones , I realized that everyone was carrying around wormholes in their pockets . 
They weren ' t physically transporting themselves ; they were mentally transporting themselves . 
They would click on a button , and they would be connected as A to B immediately . 
And I thought , " Oh , wow. I found it. This is great. " 
So over time , time and space have compressed because of this . 
You can stand on one side of the world , whisper something and be heard on the other . 
One of the other ideas that comes around is that you have a different type of time on every single device that you use . 
Every single browser tab gives you a different type of time . 
And because of that , you start to dig around for your external memories -- where did you leave them ? 
So now we ' re all these paleontologists that are digging for things that we ' ve lost on our external brains that we ' re carrying around in our pockets . 
And that incites a sort of panic architecture -- " Oh no , where ' s this thing ? " 
We ' re all " I Love Lucy " on a great assembly line of information , and we can ' t keep up . 
And so what happens is , when we bring all that into the social space , we end up checking our phones all the time . 
So we have this thing called ambient intimacy . 
It ' s not that we ' re always connected to everybody , but at anytime we can connect to anyone we want . 
And if you were able to print out everybody in your cell phone , the room would be very crowded . 
These are the people that you have access to right now , in general -- all of these people , all of your friends and family that you can connect to . 
And so there are some psychological effects that happen with this . 
One I ' m really worried about is that people aren ' t taking time for mental reflection anymore , and that they aren ' t slowing down and stopping , being around all those people in the room all the time that are trying to compete for their attention on the simultaneous time interfaces , paleontology and panic architecture . 
They ' re not just sitting there . 
And really , when you have no external input , that is a time when there is a creation of self , when you can do long-term planning , when you can try and figure out who you really are . 
And then , once you do that , you can figure out how to present your second self in a legitimate way , instead of just dealing with everything as it comes in -- and oh , I have to do this , and I have to do this , and I have to do this . 
And so this is very important . 
I ' m really worried that , especially kids today , they ' re not going to be dealing with this down-time , that they have an instantaneous button-clicking culture , and that everything comes to them , and that they become very excited about it and very addicted to it . 
So if you think about it , the world hasn ' t stopped either . 
It has its own external prosthetic devices , and these devices are helping us all to communicate and interact with each other . 
But when you actually visualize it , all the connections that we ' re doing right now -- this is an image of the mapping of the Internet -- it doesn ' t look technological . 
It actually looks very organic . 
This is the first time in the entire history of humanity that we ' ve connected in this way . 
And it ' s not that machines are taking over . 
It ' s that they ' re helping us to be more human , helping us to connect with each other . 
The most successful technology gets out of the way and helps us live our lives . 
And really , it ends up being more human than technology , because we ' re co-creating each other all the time . 
And so this is the important point that I like to study : that things are beautiful , that it ' s still a human connection -- it ' s just done in a different way . 
We ' re just increasing our humanness and our ability to connect with each other , regardless of geography . 
So that ' s why I study cyborg anthropology . 
I want you to take a look at this baby . 
What you ' re drawn to are her eyes and the skin you love to touch . 
But today I ' m going to talk to you about something you can ' t see . 
What ' s going on up in that little brain of hers . 
The modern tools of neuroscience are demonstrating to us that what ' s going on up there is nothing short of rocket science . 
And what we ' re learning is going to shed some light on what the romantic writers and poets described as the " celestial openness " of the child ' s mind . 
What we see here is a mother in India , and she ' s speaking Koro , which is a newly discovered language . 
And she ' s talking to her baby . 
What this mother -- and the 800 people who speak Koro in the world -- understands is that , to preserve this language , they need to speak it to the babies . 
And therein lies a critical puzzle . 
Why is it that you can ' t preserve a language by speaking to you and I , to the adults ? 
Well , it ' s got to do with your brain . 
What we see here is that language has a critical period for learning . 
The way to read this slide is to look at your age on the horizontal axis . 
( Laughter ) And you ' ll see on the vertical your skill at acquiring a second language . 
The babies and children are geniuses until they turn seven , and then there ' s a systematic decline . 
After puberty , we fall off the map . 
No scientists dispute this curve , but laboratories all over the world are trying to figure out why it works this way . 
Work in my lab is focused on the first critical period in development , and that is the period in which babies try to master which sounds are used in their language . 
We think , by studying how the sounds are learned , we ' ll have a model for the rest of language , and perhaps for critical periods that may exist in childhood for social , emotional and cognitive development . 
So we ' ve been studying the babies using a technique that we ' re using all over the world and the sounds of all languages . 
The baby sits on a parent ' s lap , and we train them to turn their heads when a sound changes -- like from " ah " to " ee. " 
If they do so at the appropriate time , the black box lights up and a panda bear pounds a drum . 
A six-monther adores the task . 
What have we learned ? 
Well , babies all over the world are what I like to describe as " citizens of the world. " 
They can discriminate all the sounds of all languages , no matter what country we ' re testing and what language we ' re using , and that ' s remarkable because you and I can ' t do that . 
We ' re culture-bound listeners . 
We can discriminate the sounds of our own language , but not those of foreign languages . 
So the question arises : When do those citizens of the world turn into the language-bound listeners that we are ? 
And the answer : before their first birthdays . 
What you see here is performance on that head-turn task for babies tested in Tokyo and the United States , here in Seattle , as they listened to " ra " and " la " -- sounds important to English , but not to Japanese . 
So at six to eight months , the babies are totally equivalent . 
Two months later , something incredible occurs . 
The babies in the United States are getting a lot better , babies in Japan are getting a lot worse , but both of those groups of babies are preparing for exactly the language that they are going to learn . 
So the question is : What ' s happening during this critical two-month period ? 
This is the critical period for sound development , but what ' s going on up there ? 
So there are two things going on . 
The first is that the babies are listening intently to us , and they ' re taking statistics as they listen to us talk -- they ' re taking statistics . 
So listen to two mothers speaking motherese -- the universal language we use when we talk to kids -- first in English and then in Japanese . 
( Video ) Ah , I love your big blue eyes -- so pretty and nice . 
( Japanese ) Patricia Kuhl : During the production of speech , when babies listen , what they ' re doing is taking statistics on the language that they hear . 
And those distributions grow . 
And what we ' ve learned is that babies are sensitive to the statistics , and the statistics of Japanese and English are very , very different . 
English has a lot of Rs and Ls . 
The distribution shows . 
And the distribution of Japanese is totally different , where we see a group of intermediate sounds , which is known as the Japanese " R. " 
So babies absorb the statistics of the language and it changes their brains ; it changes them from the citizens of the world to the culture-bound listeners that we are . 
But we as adults are no longer absorbing those statistics . 
We are governed by the representations in memory that were formed early in development . 
So what we ' re seeing here is changing our models of what the critical period is about . 
We ' re arguing from a mathematical standpoint that the learning of language material may slow down when our distributions stabilize . 
It ' s raising lots of questions about bilingual people . 
Bilinguals must keep two sets of statistics in mind at once and flip between them , one after the other , depending on who they ' re speaking to . 
So we asked ourselves , can the babies take statistics on a brand new language ? 
And we tested this by exposing American babies who ' d never heard a second language to Mandarin for the first time during the critical period . 
We knew that , when monolinguals were tested in Taipei and Seattle on the Mandarin sounds , they showed the same pattern . 
Six to eight months , they ' re totally equivalent . 
Two months later , something incredible happens . 
But the Taiwanese babies are getting better , not the American babies . 
What we did was expose American babies , during this period , to Mandarin . 
It was like having Mandarin relatives come and visit for a month and move into your house and talk to the babies for 12 sessions . 
Here ' s what it looked like in the laboratory . 
( Mandarin ) PK : So what have we done to their little brains ? 
( Laughter ) We had to run a control group to make sure that coming into the laboratory didn ' t improve your Mandarin skills . 
So a group of babies came in and listened to English . 
And we can see from the graph that exposure to English didn ' t improve their Mandarin . 
But look at what happened to the babies exposed to Mandarin for 12 sessions . 
They were as good as the babies in Taiwan who ' d been listening for 10 and a half months . 
What it demonstrated is that babies take statistics on a new language . 
Whatever you put in front of them , they ' ll take statistics on . 
But we wondered what role the human being played in this learning exercise . 
So we ran another group of babies in which the kids got the same dosage , the same 12 sessions , but over a television set . 
And another group of babies who had just audio exposure and looked at a teddy bear on the screen . 
What did we do to their brains ? 
What you see here is the audio result -- no learning whatsoever -- and the video result -- no learning whatsoever . 
It takes a human being for babies to take their statistics . 
The social brain is controlling when the babies are taking their statistics . 
We want to get inside the brain and see this thing happening as babies are in front of televisions , as opposed to in front of human beings . 
Thankfully , we have a new machine , magnetoencephalography , that allows us to do this . 
It looks like a hair dryer from Mars . 
But it ' s completely safe , completely noninvasive and silent . 
We ' re looking at millimeter accuracy with regard to spatial and millisecond accuracy using 306 SQUIDs -- these are superconducting quantum interference devices -- to pick up the magnetic fields that change as we do our thinking . 
We ' re the first in the world to record babies in an MEG machine while they are learning . 
So this is little Emma . 
She ' s a six-monther . 
And she ' s listening to various languages in the earphones that are in her ears . 
You can see , she can move around . 
We ' re tracking her head with little pellets in a cap , so she ' s free to move completely unconstrained . 
It ' s a technical tour de force . 
What are we seeing ? 
We ' re seeing the baby brain . 
As the baby hears a word in her language , the auditory areas light up , and then subsequently areas surrounding it that we think are related to coherence , getting the brain coordinated with its different areas , and causality , one brain area causing another to activate . 
We are embarking on a grand and golden age of knowledge about child ' s brain development . 
We ' re going to be able to see a child ' s brain as they experience an emotion , as they learn to speak and read , as they solve a math problem , as they have an idea . 
And we ' re going to be able to invent brain-based interventions for children who have difficulty learning . 
Just as the poets and writers described , we ' re going to be able to see , I think , that wondrous openness , utter and complete openness , of the mind of a child . 
In investigating the child ' s brain , we ' re going to uncover deep truths about what it means to be human , and in the process , we may be able to help keep our own minds open to learning for our entire lives . 
Two weeks ago I was in my studio in Paris , and the phone rang and I heard , " Hey , JR , you won the TED Prize 2011 . 
You have to make a wish to save the world. " 
I was lost . 
I mean , I can ' t save the world. Nobody can . 
The world is fucked up . 
Come on , you have dictators ruling the world , population is growing by millions , there ' s no more fish in the sea , the North Pole is melting and as the last TED Prize winner said , we ' re all becoming fat . 
( Laughter ) Except maybe French people . 
Whatever . 
So I called back and I told her , " Look , Amy , tell the TED guys I just won ' t show up . 
I can ' t do anything to save the world. " 
She said , " Hey , JR , your wish is not to save the world , but to change the world. " 
" Oh , all right. " 
( Laughter ) " That ' s cool. " 
I mean , technology , politics , business do change the world -- not always in a good way , but they do . 
What about art ? 
Could art change the world ? 
I started when I was 15 years old . 
And at that time , I was not thinking about changing the world . 
I was doing graffiti -- writing my name everywhere , using the city as a canvas . 
I was going in the tunnels of Paris , on the rooftops with my friends . 
Each trip was an excursion , was an adventure . 
It was like leaving our mark on society , to say , " I was here , " on the top of a building . 
So when I found a cheap camera on the subway , I started documenting those adventures with my friends and gave them back as photocopies -- really small photos just that size . 
That ' s how , at 17 years old , I started pasting them . 
And I did my first " expo de rue , " which means sidewalk gallery . 
And I framed it with color so you would not confuse it with advertising . 
I mean , the city ' s the best gallery I could imagine . 
I would never have to make a book and then present it to a gallery and let them decide if my work was nice enough to show it to people . 
I would control it directly with the public in the streets . 
So that ' s Paris . 
I would change -- depending on the places I would go -- the title of the exhibition . 
That ' s on the Champs-Elysees . 
I was quite proud of that one . 
Because I was just 18 and I was just up there on the top of the Champs-Elysees . 
Then when the photo left , the frame was still there . 
( Laughter ) November 2005 : the streets are burning . 
A large wave of riots had broken into the first projects of Paris . 
Everyone was glued to the TV , watching disturbing , frightening images taken from the edge of the neighborhood . 
I mean , these kids , without control , throwing Molotov cocktails , attacking the cops and the firemen , looting everything they could in the shops . 
These were criminals , thugs , dangerous , destroying their own environment . 
And then I saw it -- could it be possible ? -- my photo on a wall revealed by a burning car -- a pasting I ' d done a year earlier -- an illegal one -- still there . 
I mean , these were the faces of my friends . 
I know those guys . 
All of them are not angels , but they ' re not monsters either . 
So it was kind of weird to see those images and those eyes stare back at me through a television . 
So I went back there with a 28 mm lens . 
It was the only one I had at that time . 
But with that lens , you have to be as close as 10 inches from the person . 
So you can do it only with their trust . 
So I took full portraits of people from Le Bosquet . 
They were making scary faces to play the caricature of themselves . 
And then I pasted huge posters everywhere in the bourgeois area of Paris with the name , age , even building number of these guys . 
A year later , the exhibition was displayed in front of the city hall of Paris . 
And we go from thug images , who ' ve been stolen and distorted by the media , who ' s now proudly taking over his own image . 
That ' s where I realized the power of paper and glue . 
So could art change the world ? 
A year later , I was listening to all the noise about the Middle East conflict . 
I mean , at that time , trust me , they were only referring to the Israeli and Palestinian conflict . 
So with my friend Marco , we decided to go there and see who are the real Palestinians and who are the real Israelis . 
Are they so different ? 
When we got there , we just went in the street , started talking with people everywhere , and we realized that things were a bit different from the rhetoric we heard in the media . 
So we decided to take portraits of Palestinians and Israelis doing the same jobs -- taxi-driver , lawyer , cooks . 
Asked them to make a face as a sign of commitment . 
Not a smile -- that really doesn ' t tell about who you are and what you feel . 
They all accepted to be pasted next to the other . 
I decided to paste in eight Israeli and Palestinian cities and on both sides of the wall . 
We launched the biggest illegal art exhibition ever . 
We called the project Face 2 Face . 
The experts said , " No way . 
The people will not accept . 
The army will shoot you , and Hamas will kidnap you. " 
We said , " Okay , let ' s try and push as far as we can. " 
I love the way that people will ask me , " How big will my photo be ? " 
" It will be as big as your house. " 
When we did the wall , we did the Palestinian side . 
So we arrived with just our ladders and we realized that they were not high enough . 
And so Palestinians guys say , " Calm down. No wait. I ' m going to find you a solution. " 
So he went to the Church of Nativity and brought back an old ladder that was so old that it could have seen Jesus being born . 
( Laughter ) We did Face 2 Face with only six friends , two ladders , two brushes , a rented car , a camera and 20,000 square feet of paper . 
We had all sorts of help from all walks of life . 
Okay , for example , that ' s Palestine . 
We ' re in Ramallah right now . 
We ' re pasting portraits -- so both portraits in the streets in a crowded market . 
People come around us and start asking , " What are you doing here ? " 
" Oh , we ' re actually doing an art project and we are pasting an Israeli and a Palestinian doing the same job . 
And those ones are actually two taxi-drivers. " 
And then there was always a silence . 
" You mean you ' re pasting an Israeli face -- doing a face -- right here ? " 
" Well , yeah , yeah , that ' s part of the project. " 
And I would always leave that moment , and we would ask them , " So can you tell me who is who ? " 
And most of them couldn ' t say . 
( Applause ) We even pasted on Israeli military towers , and nothing happened . 
When you paste an image , it ' s just paper and glue . 
People can tear it , tag on it , or even pee on it -- some are a bit high for that , I agree -- but the people in the street , they are the curator . 
The rain and the wind will take them off anyway . 
They are not meant to stay . 
But exactly four years after , the photos , most of them are still there . 
Face 2 Face demonstrated that what we thought impossible was possible -- and , you know what , even easy . 
We didn ' t push the limit ; we just showed that they were further than anyone thought . 
In the Middle East , I experienced my work in places without [ many ] museums . 
So the reactions in the street were kind of interesting . 
So I decided to go further in this direction and go in places where there were zero museums . 
When you go in these developing societies , women are the pillars of their community , but the men are still the ones holding the streets . 
So we were inspired to create a project where men will pay tribute to women by posting their photos . 
I called that project Women Are Heroes . 
When I listened to all the stories everywhere I went on the continents , I couldn ' t always understand the complicated circumstances of their conflict . 
I just observed . 
Sometimes there was no words , no sentence , just tears . 
I just took their pictures and pasted them . 
Women Are Heroes took me around the world . 
Most of the places I went to , I decided to go there because I ' ve heard about it through the media . 
So for example , in June 2008 , I was watching TV in Paris , and then I heard about this terrible thing that happened in Rio de Janeiro -- the first favela of Brazil named Providencia . 
Three kids -- that was three students -- were [ detained ] by the army because they were not carrying their papers . 
And the army took them , and instead of bringing them to the police station , they brought them to an enemy favela where they get chopped into pieces . 
I was shocked . 
All Brazil was shocked . 
I heard it was one of the most violent favelas , because the largest drug cartel controls it . 
So I decided to go there . 
When I arrived -- I mean , I didn ' t have any contact with any NGO . 
There was none in place -- no association , no NGOs , nothing -- no eyewitnesses . 
So we just walked around , and we met a woman , and I showed her my book . 
And she said , " You know what ? 
We ' re hungry for culture . 
We need culture out there. " 
So I went out and I started with the kids . 
I just took a few photos of the kids , and the next day I came with the posters and we pasted them . 
The day after , I came back and they were already scratched . 
But that ' s okay . 
I wanted them to feel that this art belongs to them . 
Then the next day , I held a meeting on the main square and some women came . 
They were all linked to the three kids that got killed . 
There was the mother , the grandmother , the best friend -- they all wanted to shout the story . 
After that day , everyone in the favela gave me the green light . 
I took more photos , and we started the project . 
The drug lords were kind of worried about us filming in the place , so I told them , " You know what ? 
I ' m not interested in filming the violence and the weapons . 
You see that enough in the media . 
What I want to show is the incredible life and energy . 
I ' ve been seeing it around me the last few days. " 
So that ' s a really symbolic pasting , because that ' s the first one we did that you couldn ' t see from the city . 
And that ' s where the three kids got arrested , and that ' s the grandmother of one of them . 
And on that stairs , that ' s where the traffickers always stand and there ' s a lot of exchange of fire . 
Everyone there understood the project . 
And then we pasted everywhere -- the whole hill . 
( Applause ) What was interesting is that the media couldn ' t get in . 
I mean , you should see that . 
They would have to film us from a really long distance by helicopter and then have a really long lens , and we would see ourselves , on TV , pasting . 
And they would put a number : " Please call this number if you know what ' s going on in Providencia. " 
We just did a project and then left so the media wouldn ' t know . 
So how can we know about the project ? 
So they had to go and find the women and get an explanation from them . 
So you create a bridge between the media and the anonymous women . 
We kept traveling . 
We went to Africa , Sudan , Sierra Leone , Liberia , Kenya . 
In war-torn places like Monrovia , people come straight to you . 
I mean , they want to know what you ' re up to . 
They kept asking me , " What is the purpose of your project ? 
Are you an NGO ? Are you the media ? " 
Art. Just doing art . 
Some people question , " Why is it in black and white ? 
Don ' t you have color in France ? " 
( Laughter ) Or they tell you , " Are these people all dead ? " 
Some who understood the project would explain it to others . 
And to a man who did not understand , I heard someone say , " You know , you ' ve been here for a few hours trying to understand , discussing with your fellows . 
During that time , you haven ' t thought about what you ' re going to eat tomorrow . 
This is art. " 
I think it ' s people ' s curiosity that motivates them to come into the projects . 
And then it becomes more . 
It becomes a desire , a need , an armor . 
On this bridge that ' s in Monrovia , ex-rebel soldiers helped us pasting a portrait of a woman that might have been raped during the war . 
Women are always the first ones targeted during conflict . 
This is Kibera , Kenya , one of the largest slums of Africa . 
You might have seen images about the post-election violence that happened there in 2008 . 
This time we covered the roofs of the houses , but we didn ' t use paper , because paper doesn ' t prevent the rain from leaking inside the house -- vinyl does . 
Then art becomes useful . 
So the people kept it . 
You know what I love is , for example , when you see the biggest eye there , there are so [ many ] houses inside . 
And I went there a few months ago -- photos are still there -- and it was missing a piece of the eye . 
So I asked the people what happened . 
" Oh , that guy just moved. " 
( Laughter ) When the roofs were covered , a woman said as a joke , " Now God can see me. " 
When you look at Kibera now , they look back . 
Okay , India . 
Before I start that , just so you know , each time we go to a place , we don ' t have authorization , so we set up like commandos -- we ' re a group of friends who arrive there , and we try to paste on the walls . 
But there are places where you just can ' t paste on a wall . 
In India it was just impossible to paste . 
I heard culturally and because of the law , they would just arrest us at the first pasting . 
So we decided to paste white , white on the walls . 
So imagine white guys pasting white papers . 
So people would come to us and ask us , " Hey , what are you up to ? " 
" Oh , you know , we ' re just doing art. " " Art ? " 
Of course , they were confused . 
But you know how India has a lot of dust in the streets , and the more dust you would have going up in the air , on the white paper you can almost see , but there is this sticky part like when you reverse a sticker . 
So the more dust you have , the more it will reveal the photo . 
So we could just walk in the street during the next days and the photos would get revealed by themselves . 
So we didn ' t get caught this time . 
Each project -- that ' s a film from Women Are Heroes . 
( Music ) Okay . 
For each project we do a film . 
And most of what you see -- that ' s a trailer from " Women Are Heroes " -- its images , photography , taken one after the other . 
And the photos kept traveling even without us . 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) Hopefully , you ' ll see the film , and you ' ll understand the scope of the project and what the people felt when they saw those photos . 
Because that ' s a big part of it. There ' s layers behind each photo . 
Behind each image is a story . 
Women Are Heroes created a new dynamic in each of the communities , and the women kept that dynamic after we left . 
For example , we did books -- not for sale -- that all the community would get . 
But to get it , they would have to [ get ] it signed by one of the women . 
We did that in most of the places . 
We go back regularly . 
And so in Providencia , for example , in the favela , we have a cultural center running there . 
In Kibera , each year we cover more roofs . 
Because of course , when we left , the people who were just at the edge of the project said , " Hey , what about my roof ? " 
So we decided to come the year after and keep doing the project . 
A really important point for me is that I don ' t use any brand or corporate sponsors . 
So I have no responsibility to anyone but myself and the subjects . 
( Applause ) And that is for me one of the more important things in the work . 
I think , today , as important as the result is the way you do things . 
And that has always been a central part of the work . 
And what ' s interesting is that fine line that I have with images and advertising . 
We just did some pasting in Los Angeles on another project in the last weeks . 
And I was even invited to cover the MOCA museum . 
But yesterday the city called them and said , " Look , you ' re going to have to tear it down . 
Because this can be taken for advertising , and because of the law , it has to be taken down. " 
But tell me , advertising for what ? 
The people I photograph were proud to participate in the project and to have their photo in the community . 
But they asked me for a promise basically . 
They asked me , " Please , make our story travel with you. " 
So I did. That ' s Paris . 
That ' s Rio . 
In each place , we built exhibitions with a story , and the story traveled . 
You understand the full scope of the project . 
That ' s London . 
New York . 
And today , they are with you in Long Beach . 
All right , recently I started a public art project where I don ' t use my artwork anymore . 
I use Man Ray , Helen Levitt , Giacomelli , other people ' s artwork . 
It doesn ' t matter today if it ' s your photo or not . 
The importance is what you do with the images , the statement it makes where it ' s pasted . 
So for example , I pasted the photo of the minaret in Switzerland a few weeks after they voted the law forbidding minarets in the country . 
( Applause ) This image of three men wearing gas masks was taken in Chernobyl originally , and I pasted it in Southern Italy , where the mafia sometimes bury the garbage under the ground . 
In some ways , art can change the world . 
Art is not supposed to change the world , to change practical things , but to change perceptions . 
Art can change the way we see the world . 
Art can create an analogy . 
Actually the fact that art cannot change things makes it a neutral place for exchanges and discussions , and then enables you to change the world . 
When I do my work , I have two kinds of reactions . 
People say , " Oh , why don ' t you go in Iraq or Afghanistan . 
They would be really useful. " 
Or , " How can we help ? " 
I presume that you belong to the second category , and that ' s good , because for that project , I ' m going to ask you to take the photos and paste them . 
So now my wish is : ( mock drum roll ) ( Laughter ) I wish for you to stand up for what you care about by participating in a global art project , and together we ' ll turn the world inside out . 
And this starts right now . 
Yes , everyone in the room . 
Everyone watching . 
I wanted that wish to actually start now . 
So a subject you ' re passionate about , a person who you want to tell their story or even your own photos -- tell me what you stand for . 
Take the photos , the portraits , upload it -- I ' ll give you all the details -- and I ' ll send you back your poster. Join by groups and reveal things to the world . 
The full data is on the website -- insideoutproject.net -- that is launching today . 
What we see changes who we are . 
When we act together , the whole thing is much more than the sum of the parts . 
So I hope that , together , we ' ll create something that the world will remember . 
And this starts right now and depends on you . 
Imagine if you could record your life -- everything you said , everything you did , available in a perfect memory store at your fingertips , so you could go back and find memorable moments and relive them , or sift through traces of time and discover patterns in your own life that previously had gone undiscovered . 
Well that ' s exactly the journey that my family began five and a half years ago . 
This is my wife and collaborator , Rupal . 
And on this day , at this moment , we walked into the house with our first child , our beautiful baby boy . 
And we walked into a house with a very special home video recording system . 
( Video ) Man : Okay . 
Deb Roy : This moment and thousands of other moments special for us were captured in our home because in every room in the house , if you looked up , you ' d see a camera and a microphone , and if you looked down , you ' d get this bird ' s-eye view of the room . 
Here ' s our living room , the baby bedroom , kitchen , dining room and the rest of the house . 
And all of these fed into a disc array that was designed for a continuous capture . 
So here we are flying through a day in our home as we move from sunlit morning through incandescent evening and , finally , lights out for the day . 
Over the course of three years , we recorded eight to 10 hours a day , amassing roughly a quarter-million hours of multi-track audio and video . 
So you ' re looking at a piece of what is by far the largest home video collection ever made . 
( Laughter ) And what this data represents for our family at a personal level , the impact has already been immense , and we ' re still learning its value . 
Countless moments of unsolicited natural moments , not posed moments , are captured there , and we ' re starting to learn how to discover them and find them . 
But there ' s also a scientific reason that drove this project , which was to use this natural longitudinal data to understand the process of how a child learns language -- that child being my son . 
And so with many privacy provisions put in place to protect everyone who was recorded in the data , we made elements of the data available to my trusted research team at MIT so we could start teasing apart patterns in this massive data set , trying to understand the influence of social environments on language acquisition . 
So we ' re looking here at one of the first things we started to do . 
This is my wife and I cooking breakfast in the kitchen , and as we move through space and through time , a very everyday pattern of life in the kitchen . 
In order to convert this opaque , 90,000 hours of video into something that we could start to see , we use motion analysis to pull out , as we move through space and through time , what we call space-time worms . 
And this has become part of our toolkit for being able to look and see where the activities are in the data , and with it , trace the pattern of , in particular , where my son moved throughout the home , so that we could focus our transcription efforts , all of the speech environment around my son -- all of the words that he heard from myself , my wife , our nanny , and over time , the words he began to produce . 
So with that technology and that data and the ability to , with machine assistance , transcribe speech , we ' ve now transcribed well over seven million words of our home transcripts . 
And with that , let me take you now for a first tour into the data . 
So you ' ve all , I ' m sure , seen time-lapse videos where a flower will blossom as you accelerate time . 
I ' d like you to now experience the blossoming of a speech form . 
My son , soon after his first birthday , would say " gaga " to mean water . 
And over the course of the next half-year , he slowly learned to approximate the proper adult form , " water. " 
So we ' re going to cruise through half a year in about 40 seconds . 
No video here , so you can focus on the sound , the acoustics , of a new kind of trajectory : gaga to water . 
( Audio ) Baby : Gagagagagaga Gaga gaga gaga guga guga guga wada gaga gaga guga gaga wader guga guga water water water water water water water water water . 
DR : He sure nailed it , didn ' t he . 
( Applause ) So he didn ' t just learn water . 
Over the course of the 24 months , the first two years that we really focused on , this is a map of every word he learned in chronological order . 
And because we have full transcripts , we ' ve identified each of the 503 words that he learned to produce by his second birthday . 
He was an early talker . 
And so we started to analyze why . 
Why were certain words born before others ? 
This is one of the first results that came out of our study a little over a year ago that really surprised us . 
The way to interpret this apparently simple graph is , on the vertical is an indication of how complex caregiver utterances are based on the length of utterances . 
And the [ horizontal ] axis is time . 
And all of the data , we aligned based on the following idea : Every time my son would learn a word , we would trace back and look at all of the language he heard that contained that word . 
And we would plot the relative length of the utterances . 
And what we found was this curious phenomena , that caregiver speech would systematically dip to a minimum , making language as simple as possible , and then slowly ascend back up in complexity . 
And the amazing thing was that bounce , that dip , lined up almost precisely with when each word was born -- word after word , systematically . 
So it appears that all three primary caregivers -- myself , my wife and our nanny -- were systematically and , I would think , subconsciously restructuring our language to meet him at the birth of a word and bring him gently into more complex language . 
And the implications of this -- there are many , but one I just want to point out , is that there must be amazing feedback loops . 
Of course , my son is learning from his linguistic environment , but the environment is learning from him . 
That environment , people , are in these tight feedback loops and creating a kind of scaffolding that has not been noticed until now . 
But that ' s looking at the speech context . 
What about the visual context ? 
We ' re not looking at -- think of this as a dollhouse cutaway of our house . 
We ' ve taken those circular fish-eye lens cameras , and we ' ve done some optical correction , and then we can bring it into three-dimensional life . 
So welcome to my home . 
This is a moment , one moment captured across multiple cameras . 
The reason we did this is to create the ultimate memory machine , where you can go back and interactively fly around and then breathe video-life into this system . 
What I ' m going to do is give you an accelerated view of 30 minutes , again , of just life in the living room . 
That ' s me and my son on the floor . 
And there ' s video analytics that are tracking our movements . 
My son is leaving red ink. I am leaving green ink . 
We ' re now on the couch , looking out through the window at cars passing by . 
And finally , my son playing in a walking toy by himself . 
Now we freeze the action , 30 minutes , we turn time into the vertical axis , and we open up for a view of these interaction traces we ' ve just left behind . 
And we see these amazing structures -- these little knots of two colors of thread we call " social hot spots. " 
The spiral thread we call a " solo hot spot. " 
And we think that these affect the way language is learned . 
What we ' d like to do is start understanding the interaction between these patterns and the language that my son is exposed to to see if we can predict how the structure of when words are heard affects when they ' re learned -- so in other words , the relationship between words and what they ' re about in the world . 
So here ' s how we ' re approaching this . 
In this video , again , my son is being traced out . 
He ' s leaving red ink behind . 
And there ' s our nanny by the door . 
( Video ) Nanny : You want water ? ( Baby : Aaaa. ) Nanny : All right. ( Baby : Aaaa. ) DR : She offers water , and off go the two worms over to the kitchen to get water . 
And what we ' ve done is use the word " water " to tag that moment , that bit of activity . 
And now we take the power of data and take every time my son ever heard the word water and the context he saw it in , and we use it to penetrate through the video and find every activity trace that co-occurred with an instance of water . 
And what this data leaves in its wake is a landscape . 
We call these wordscapes . 
This is the wordscape for the word water , and you can see most of the action is in the kitchen . 
That ' s where those big peaks are over to the left . 
And just for contrast , we can do this with any word . 
We can take the word " bye " as in " good bye. " 
And we ' re now zoomed in over the entrance to the house . 
And we look , and we find , as you would expect , a contrast in the landscape where the word " bye " occurs much more in a structured way . 
So we ' re using these structures to start predicting the order of language acquisition , and that ' s ongoing work now . 
In my lab , which we ' re peering into now , at MIT -- this is at the media lab . 
This has become my favorite way of videographing just about any space . 
Three of the key people in this project , Philip DeCamp , Rony Kubat and Brandon Roy are pictured here . 
Philip has been a close collaborator on all the visualizations you ' re seeing . 
And Michael Fleischman was another Ph.D. student in my lab who worked with me on this home video analysis , and he made the following observation : that " just the way that we ' re analyzing how language connects to events which provide common ground for language , that same idea we can take out of your home , Deb , and we can apply it to the world of public media. " 
And so our effort took an unexpected turn . 
Think of mass media as providing common ground and you have the recipe for taking this idea to a whole new place . 
We ' ve started analyzing television content using the same principles -- analyzing event structure of a TV signal -- episodes of shows , commercials , all of the components that make up the event structure . 
And we ' re now , with satellite dishes , pulling and analyzing a good part of all the TV being watched in the United States . 
And you don ' t have to now go and instrument living rooms with microphones to get people ' s conversations , you just tune into publicly available social media feeds . 
So we ' re pulling in about three billion comments a month , and then the magic happens . 
You have the event structure , the common ground that the words are about , coming out of the television feeds ; you ' ve got the conversations that are about those topics ; and through semantic analysis -- and this is actually real data you ' re looking at from our data processing -- each yellow line is showing a link being made between a comment in the wild and a piece of event structure coming out of the television signal . 
And the same idea now can be built up . 
And we get this wordscape , except now words are not assembled in my living room . 
Instead , the context , the common ground activities , are the content on television that ' s driving the conversations . 
And what we ' re seeing here , these skyscrapers now , are commentary that are linked to content on television . 
Same concept , but looking at communication dynamics in a very different sphere . 
And so fundamentally , rather than , for example , measuring content based on how many people are watching , this gives us the basic data for looking at engagement properties of content . 
And just like we can look at feedback cycles and dynamics in a family , we can now open up the same concepts and look at much larger groups of people . 
This is a subset of data from our database -- just 50,000 out of several million -- and the social graph that connects them through publicly available sources . 
And if you put them on one plain , a second plain is where the content lives . 
So we have the programs and the sporting events and the commercials , and all of the link structures that tie them together make a content graph . 
And then the important third dimension . 
Each of the links that you ' re seeing rendered here is an actual connection made between something someone said and a piece of content . 
And there are , again , now tens of millions of these links that give us the connective tissue of social graphs and how they relate to content . 
And we can now start to probe the structure in interesting ways . 
So if we , for example , trace the path of one piece of content that drives someone to comment on it , and then we follow where that comment goes , and then look at the entire social graph that becomes activated and then trace back to see the relationship between that social graph and content , a very interesting structure becomes visible . 
We call this a co-viewing clique , a virtual living room if you will . 
And there are fascinating dynamics at play . 
It ' s not one way . 
A piece of content , an event , causes someone to talk . 
They talk to other people . 
That drives tune-in behavior back into mass media , and you have these cycles that drive the overall behavior . 
Another example -- very different -- another actual person in our database -- and we ' re finding at least hundreds , if not thousands , of these . 
We ' ve given this person a name . 
This is a pro-amateur , or pro-am media critic who has this high fan-out rate . 
So a lot of people are following this person -- very influential -- and they have a propensity to talk about what ' s on TV . 
So this person is a key link in connecting mass media and social media together . 
One last example from this data : Sometimes it ' s actually a piece of content that is special . 
So if we go and look at this piece of content , President Obama ' s State of the Union address from just a few weeks ago , and look at what we find in this same data set , at the same scale , the engagement properties of this piece of content are truly remarkable . 
A nation exploding in conversation in real time in response to what ' s on the broadcast . 
And of course , through all of these lines are flowing unstructured language . 
We can X-ray and get a real-time pulse of a nation , real-time sense of the social reactions in the different circuits in the social graph being activated by content . 
So , to summarize , the idea is this : As our world becomes increasingly instrumented and we have the capabilities to collect and connect the dots between what people are saying and the context they ' re saying it in , what ' s emerging is an ability to see new social structures and dynamics that have previously not been seen . 
It ' s like building a microscope or telescope and revealing new structures about our own behavior around communication . 
And I think the implications here are profound , whether it ' s for science , for commerce , for government , or perhaps most of all , for us as individuals . 
And so just to return to my son , when I was preparing this talk , he was looking over my shoulder , and I showed him the clips I was going to show to you today , and I asked him for permission -- granted . 
And then I went on to reflect , " Isn ' t it amazing , this entire database , all these recordings , I ' m going to hand off to you and to your sister " -- who arrived two years later -- " and you guys are going to be able to go back and re-experience moments that you could never , with your biological memory , possibly remember the way you can now ? " 
And he was quiet for a moment . 
And I thought , " What am I thinking ? 
He ' s five years old. He ' s not going to understand this. " 
And just as I was having that thought , he looked up at me and said , " So that when I grow up , I can show this to my kids ? " 
And I thought , " Wow , this is powerful stuff. " 
So I want to leave you with one last memorable moment from our family . 
This is the first time our son took more than two steps at once -- captured on film . 
And I really want you to focus on something as I take you through . 
It ' s a cluttered environment ; it ' s natural life . 
My mother ' s in the kitchen , cooking , and , of all places , in the hallway , I realize he ' s about to do it , about to take more than two steps . 
And so you hear me encouraging him , realizing what ' s happening , and then the magic happens . 
Listen very carefully . 
About three steps in , he realizes something magic is happening , and the most amazing feedback loop of all kicks in , and he takes a breath in , and he whispers " wow " and instinctively I echo back the same . 
And so let ' s fly back in time to that memorable moment . 
( Video ) DR : Hey . 
Come here . 
Can you do it ? 
Oh , boy . 
Baby : Yeah . 
DR : Ma , he ' s walking . 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) DR : Thank you . 
This is a river . 
This is a stream . 
This is a river . 
This is happening all over the country . 
There are tens of thousands of miles of dewatered streams in the United States . 
On this map , the colored areas represent water conflicts . 
Similar problems are emerging in the East as well . 
The reasons vary state to state , but mostly in the details . 
There are 4,000 miles of dewatered streams in Montana alone . 
They would ordinarily support fish and other wildlife . 
They ' re the veins of the ecosystem , and they ' re often empty veins . 
I want to tell you the story of just one of these streams , because it ' s an archetype for the larger story . 
This is Prickly Pear Creek . 
It runs through a populated area from East Helena to Lake Helena . 
It supports wild fish including cutthroat , brown and rainbow trout . 
Nearly every year for more than a hundred years ... 
it looked like this in the summer . 
How did we get here ? 
Well , it started back in the late 1800s when people started settling in places like Montana . 
In short , there was a lot of water and there weren ' t very many people . 
But as more people showed up wanting water , the folks who were there first got a little concerned , and in 1865 , Montana passed its first water law . 
It basically said , everybody near the stream can share in the stream . 
Oddly , a lot of people showed up wanting to share the stream , and the folks who were there first got concerned enough to bring out their lawyers . 
There were precedent-setting suits in 1870 and 1872 , both involving Prickly Pear Creek . 
And in 1921 , the Montana Supreme Court ruled in a case involving Prickly Pear that the folks who were there first had the first , or " senior water rights. " 
These senior water rights are key . 
The problem is that all over the West now it looks like this . 
Some of these creeks have claims for 50 to 100 times more water than is actually in the stream . 
And the senior water rights holders , if they don ' t use their water right , they risk losing their water right -- along with the economic value that goes with it . 
So they have no incentive to conserve . 
So it ' s not just about the number of people ; the system itself creates a disincentive to conserve because you can lose your water right if you don ' t use it . 
So after decades of lawsuits and 140 years , now , of experience , we still have this . 
It ' s a broken system . 
There ' s a disincentive to conserve , because if you don ' t use your water right , you can lose your water right . 
And I ' m sure you all know , this has created significant conflicts between the agricultural and environmental communities . 
OK , now I ' m going to change gears here . 
Most of you will be happy to know that the rest of the presentation ' s free ... 
( Laughter ) and some of you ' ll be happy to know that it involves beer . 
( Laughter ) There ' s another thing happening around the country , which is that companies are starting to get concerned about their water footprint . 
They ' re concerned about securing an adequate supply of water , they ' re trying to be really efficient with their water use , and they ' re concerned about how their water use affects the image of their brand . 
Well , it ' s a national problem , but I ' m going to tell you another story from Montana ... 
and it involves beer . 
I bet you didn ' t know , it takes about 5 pints of water to make a pint of beer . 
If you include all the drain , it takes more than a hundred pints of water to make a pint of beer . 
Now the brewers in Montana have already done a lot to reduce their water consumption , but they still use millions of gallons of water . 
I mean , there ' s water in beer . 
So what can they do about this remaining water footprint that can have serious effects on the ecosystem ? 
These ecosystems are really important to the Montana brewers and their customers . 
After all , there ' s a strong correlation between water and fishing , and for some , there ' s a strong correlation between fishing and beer . 
( Laughter ) So the Montana brewers and their customers are concerned and they ' re looking for some way to address the problem . 
So how can they address this remaining water footprint ? 
Remember Prickly Pear . 
Up until now , business water stewardship has been limited to measuring and reducing , and we ' re suggesting that the next step is to restore . 
It ' s a broken system . 
You ' ve got a disincentive to conserve , because if you don ' t use your water right , you risk losing your water right . 
Well , we decided to connect these two worlds -- the world of the companies with their water footprints and the world of the farmers with their senior water rights on these creeks . 
In some states , senior water rights holders can leave their water in the stream while legally protecting it from others , and maintaining their water right . 
After all , it is their water right , and if they want to use that water right to help the fish grow in the stream , it ' s their right to do so . 
But they have no incentive to do so . 
So , working with local water trusts , we created an incentive to do so . 
We pay them to leave their water in stream . 
That ' s what ' s happening here . 
This individual has made the choice and is closing this water diversion , leaving the water in the stream . 
He doesn ' t lose the water right , he just chooses to apply that right , or some portion of it , to the stream , instead of to the land . 
Because he ' s the senior water-rights holder , he can protect the water from other users in the stream . 
OK ? 
He gets paid to leave the water in the stream . 
This guy ' s measuring the water that this leaves in the stream . 
We then take the measured water , we divide it into thousand-gallon increments . 
Each increment gets a serial number and a certificate , and then the brewers and others buy those certificates as a way to return water to these degraded ecosystems . 
The brewers pay to restore water to the stream . 
It provides a simple , inexpensive and measurable way to return water to these degraded ecosystems , while giving farmers an economic choice and giving businesses concerned about their water footprints an easy way to deal with them . 
After 140 years of conflict and 100 years of dry streams , a circumstance that litigation and regulation has not solved , we put together a market-based , willing buyer , willing seller solution -- a solution that does not require litigation . 
It ' s about giving folks concerned about their water footprints a real opportunity to put water where it ' s critically needed , into these degraded ecosystems , while at the same time providing farmers a meaningful economic choice about how their water is used . 
These transactions create allies , not enemies . 
They connect people rather than dividing them . 
And they provide needed economic support for rural communities . 
And most importantly , it ' s working . 
We ' ve returned more than four billion gallons of water to degraded ecosystems . 
We ' ve connected senior water-rights holders with brewers in Montana , with hotels and tea companies in Oregon , and with high-tech companies that use a lot of water in the Southwest . 
And when we make these connections , we can and we do turn this ... 
( Applause ) Thank you very much . 
I was only four years old when I saw my mother load a washing machine for the very first time in her life . 
That was a great day for my mother . 
My mother and father had been saving money for years to be able to buy that machine , and the first day it was going to be used , even Grandma was invited to see the machine . 
( Laughter ) And Grandma was even more excited . 
Throughout her life , she had been heating water with firewood , and she had hand-washed laundry for seven children . 
And now , she was going to watch electricity do that work . 
My mother carefully opened the door , and she loaded the laundry into the machine , like this . 
And then , when she closed the door , Grandma said , " No , no , no , no ! 
Let me ! Let me push the button ! " 
( Laughter ) And Grandma pushed the button , and she said , " Oh , fantastic ! 
I want to see this ! Give me a chair ! Give me a chair ! I want to see it , " and she sat down in front of the machine , and she watched the entire washing program . 
( Laughter ) She was mesmerized . 
To my grandmother , the washing machine was a miracle . 
Today , in Sweden and other rich countries , people are using so many different machines . 
Look -- the homes are full of machines . 
I can ' t even name them all . 
And they also , when they want to travel , they use flying machines that can take them to remote destinations . 
And yet , in the world , there are so many people who still heat the water on fire , and they cook their food on fire . 
Sometimes they don ' t even have enough food . 
And they live below the poverty line . 
There are two billion fellow human beings who live on less than two dollars a day . 
And the richest people over there -- there ' s one billion people , and they live above what I call the " air line " -- ( Laughter ) because they spend more than 80 dollars a day on their consumption . 
But this is just one , two , three billion people , and obviously , there are seven billion people in the world , so there must be one , two , three , four billion people more who live in between the poverty and the air line . 
They have electricity , but the question is : How many have washing machines ? 
I ' ve done the scrutiny of market data , and I ' ve found that , indeed , the washing machine has penetrated below the air line , and today , there ' s an additional one billion people out there who live above the " wash line. " 
( Laughter ) And they consume for more than 40 dollars per day . 
So two billion have access to washing machines . 
And the remaining five billion -- how do they wash ? 
Or , to be more precise , how do most of the women in the world wash ? 
Because it remains the hard work for women to wash . 
They wash like this : by hand . 
It ' s hard , time-consuming labor , which they have to do for hours every week . 
And sometimes they also have to bring water from far away to do the laundry at home , or they have to bring the laundry away to a stream far off . 
And they want the washing machine . 
They don ' t want to spend such a large part of their life doing this hard work with so relatively low productivity . 
And there ' s nothing different in their wish than it was for my grandma . 
Look here , two generations ago in Sweden -- picking water from the stream , heating with firewood and washing like that . 
They want the washing machine in exactly the same way . 
But when I lecture to environmentally concerned students , they tell me , " No , everybody in the world cannot have cars and washing machines. " 
How can we tell this woman that she isn ' t going to have a washing machine ? 
And then I ask my students -- over the last two years , I ' ve asked -- " How many of you don ' t use a car ? " 
And some of them proudly raise their hand and say , " I don ' t use a car. " 
And then I put the really tough question : " How many of you hand-wash your jeans and your bedsheets ? " 
And no one raised their hand . 
Even the hardcore in the green movement use washing machines . 
( Laughter ) So how come [ this is ] something that everyone uses and they think others will not stop it ? 
What is special with this ? 
Here we are . 
Look here. You see the seven billion people up there ? 
The air people , the wash people , the bulb people and the fire people . 
One unit like this is an energy unit of fossil fuel -- oil , coal or gas . 
That ' s what most of the electricity and the energy in the world is . 
And it ' s 12 units used in the entire world , and the richest one billion , they use six of them . 
Half of the energy is used by one seventh of the world population . 
And these ones , who have washing machines but not a house full of other machines , they use two . 
This group uses three , one each . 
And they also have electricity . 
That makes 12 of them . 
But the main concern for the environmentally interested students -- and they are right -- is about the future . 
What are the trends ? 
If we just prolong the trends , without any real advanced analysis , to 2050 , there are two things that can increase the energy use : first , population growth ; second , economic growth . 
Population growth will mainly occur among the poorest people here , because they have high child mortality and they have many children per woman . 
And that will get you two extra , but that won ' t change the energy use very much . 
The best of here in the emerging economies -- I call them " the New East " -- they will jump the air line . 
" Wopp ! " they will say . 
And they will start to use as much as the Old West are doing already . 
( Laughter ) And these people , they want the washing machine . 
I told you. They ' ll go there . 
And they will double their energy use . 
And we hope that the poor people will get into the electric light . 
And they ' ll get a two-child family without a stop in population growth . 
But the total energy consumption will increase to 22 units . 
And these 22 units -- still , the richest people use most of them . 
So what needs to be done ? 
Because the risk , the high probability of climate change is real . 
It ' s real . 
Of course , they must be more energy efficient . 
They must change their behavior in some way . 
They must also start to produce green energy , much more green energy . 
But until they have the same energy consumption per person , they shouldn ' t give advice to others -- what to do and what not to do . 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) Here , we can get more green energy all over . 
This is what we hope might happen . 
But I can assure you that this woman in the favela in Rio , she wants a washing machine . 
She ' s very happy about her minister of energy that provided electricity to everyone -- so happy that she even voted for her . 
And she became Dilma Rousseff , the president-elect of one of the biggest democracies in the world , moving from minister of energy to president . 
If you have democracy , people will vote for washing machines . 
They love them ! 
( Laughter ) And what ' s the magic with them ? 
My mother explained the magic with this machine the very , very first day . 
She said , " Now , Hans . 
We have loaded the laundry . 
And now we can go to the library. " 
Because this is the magic : you load the laundry , and what do you get out of the machine ? 
You get books out of the machines , children ' s books . 
And mother got time to read for me . 
She loved this . 
I got the " ABC ' s " -- this is why I started my career as a professor , when my mother had time to read for me . 
And she also got books for herself . 
She managed to study English and learn that as a foreign language . 
And she read so many novels , so many different novels here . 
And we really , we really loved this machine . 
( Laughter ) And what we said , my mother and me , " Thank you , industrialization . 
Thank you , steel mill . 
Thank you , power station . 
And thank you , chemical processing industry that gave us time to read books. " 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) 
I know what you ' re thinking . 
You think I ' ve lost my way , and somebody ' s going to come on the stage in a minute and guide me gently back to my seat . 
( Applause ) I get that all the time in Dubai . 
" Here on holiday are you , dear ? " 
( Laughter ) " Come to visit the children ? 
How long are you staying ? " 
Well actually , I hope for a while longer yet . 
I have been living and teaching in the Gulf for over 30 years . 
( Applause ) And in that time , I have seen a lot of changes . 
Now that statistic is quite shocking . 
And I want to talk to you today about language loss and the globalization of English . 
I want to tell you about my friend who was teaching English to adults in Abu Dhabi . 
And one fine day , she decided to take them into the garden to teach them some nature vocabulary . 
But it was she who ended up learning all the Arabic words for the local plants , as well as their uses -- medicinal uses , cosmetics , cooking , herbal . 
How did those students get all that knowledge ? 
Of course , from their grandparents and even their great-grandparents . 
It ' s not necessary to tell you how important it is to be able to communicate across generations . 
But sadly , today , languages are dying at an unprecedented rate . 
A language dies every 14 days . 
Now , at the same time , English is the undisputed global language . 
Could there be a connection ? 
Well I don ' t know . 
But I do know that I ' ve seen a lot of changes . 
When I first came out to the Gulf , I came to Kuwait in the days when it was still a hardship post . 
Actually , not that long ago . 
That is a little bit too early . 
But nevertheless , I was recruited by the British Council , along with about 25 other teachers . 
And we were the first non-Muslims to teach in the state schools there in Kuwait . 
We were brought to teach English because the government wanted to modernize the country and to empower the citizens through education . 
And of course , the U.K. benefited from some of that lovely oil wealth . 
Okay . 
Now this is the major change that I ' ve seen -- how teaching English has morphed from being a mutually beneficial practice to becoming a massive international business that it is today . 
No longer just a foreign language on the school curriculum , and no longer the sole domain of mother England , it has become a bandwagon for every English-speaking nation on earth . 
And why not ? 
After all , the best education -- according to the latest World University Rankings -- is to be found in the universities of the U.K. and the U.S . 
So everybody wants to have an English education , naturally . 
But if you ' re not a native speaker , you have to pass a test . 
Now can it be right to reject a student on linguistic ability alone ? 
Perhaps you have a computer scientist who ' s a genius . 
Would he need the same language as a lawyer , for example ? 
Well , I don ' t think so . 
We English teachers reject them all the time . 
We put a stop sign , and we stop them in their tracks . 
They can ' t pursue their dream any longer , ' til they get English . 
Now let me put it this way : if I met a monolingual Dutch speaker who had the cure for cancer , would I stop him from entering my British University ? 
I don ' t think so . 
But indeed , that is exactly what we do . 
We English teachers are the gatekeepers . 
And you have to satisfy us first that your English is good enough . 
Now it can be dangerous to give too much power to a narrow segment of society . 
Maybe the barrier would be too universal . 
" But , " I hear you say , " what about the research ? 
It ' s all in English. " 
So the books are in English , the journals are done in English , but that is a self-fulfilling prophecy . 
It feeds the English requirement . 
And so it goes on . 
I ask you , what happened to translation ? 
If you think about the Islamic Golden Age , there was lots of translation then . 
They translated from Latin and Greek into Arabic , into Persian , and then it was translated on into the Germanic languages of Europe and the Romance languages . 
And so light shone upon the Dark Ages of Europe . 
Now don ' t get me wrong ; I am not against teaching English , all you English teachers out there . 
I love it that we have a global language . 
We need one today more than ever . 
But I am against using it as a barrier . 
Do we really want to end up with 600 languages and the main one being English , or Chinese ? 
We need more than that. Where do we draw the line ? 
This system equates intelligence with a knowledge of English , which is quite arbitrary . 
( Applause ) And I want to remind you that the giants upon whose shoulders today ' s intelligentsia stand did not have to have English , they didn ' t have to pass an English test . 
Case in point , Einstein . 
He , by the way , was considered remedial at school because he was , in fact , dyslexic . 
But fortunately for the world , he did not have to pass an English test . 
Because they didn ' t start until 1964 with TOEFL , the American test of English . 
Now it ' s exploded . 
There are lots and lots of tests of English . 
And millions and millions of students take these tests every year . 
Now you might think , you and me , " Those fees aren ' t bad , they ' re okay , " but they are prohibitive to so many millions of poor people . 
So immediately , we ' re rejecting them . 
( Applause ) It brings to mind a headline I saw recently : " Education : The Great Divide. " 
Now I get it , I understand why people would want to focus on English . 
They want to give their children the best chance in life . 
And to do that , they need a Western education . 
Because , of course , the best jobs go to people out of the Western Universities , that I put on earlier . 
It ' s a circular thing . 
Let me tell you a story about two scientists , two English scientists . 
They were doing an experiment to do with genetics and the forelimbs and the hind limbs of animals . 
But they couldn ' t get the results they wanted . 
They really didn ' t know what to do , until along came a German scientist who realized that they were using two words for forelimb and hind limb , whereas genetics does not differentiate and neither does German . 
So bingo , problem solved . 
If you can ' t think a thought , you are stuck . 
But if another language can think that thought , then , by cooperating , we can achieve and learn so much more . 
My daughter came to England from Kuwait . 
She had studied science and mathematics in Arabic . 
It ' s an Arabic-medium school . 
She had to translate it into English at her grammar school . 
And she was the best in the class at those subjects . 
Which tells us that when students come to us from abroad , we may not be giving them enough credit for what they know , and they know it in their own language . 
When a language dies , we don ' t know what we lose with that language . 
This is -- I don ' t know if you saw it on CNN recently -- they gave the Heroes Award to a young Kenyan shepherd boy who couldn ' t study at night in his village , like all the village children , because the kerosene lamp , it had smoke and it damaged his eyes . 
And anyway , there was never enough kerosene , because what does a dollar a day buy for you ? 
So he invented a cost-free solar lamp . 
And now the children in his village get the same grades at school as the children who have electricity at home . 
( Applause ) When he received his award , he said these lovely words : " The children can lead Africa from what it is today , a dark continent , to a light continent. " 
A simple idea , but it could have such far-reaching consequences . 
People who have no light , whether it ' s physical or metaphorical , cannot pass our exams , and we can never know what they know . 
Let us not keep them and ourselves in the dark . 
Let us celebrate diversity . 
Mind your language . 
Use it to spread great ideas . 
( Applause ) Thank you very much . 
My journey to become a polar specialist , photographing , specializing in the polar regions , began when I was four years old , when my family moved from southern Canada to Northern Baffin Island , up by Greenland . 
There we lived with the Inuit in the tiny Inuit community of 200 Inuit people , where [ we ] were one of three non-Inuit families . 
And in this community , we didn ' t have a television ; we didn ' t have computers , obviously , radio . 
We didn ' t even have a telephone . 
All of my time was spent outside with the Inuit , playing . 
The snow and the ice were my sandbox , and the Inuit were my teachers . 
And that ' s where I became truly obsessed with this polar realm . 
And I knew someday that I was going to do something that had to do with trying to share news about it and protect it . 
I ' d like to share with you , for just two minutes only , some images , a cross-section of my work , to the beautiful music by Brandi Carlile , " Have You Ever. " 
I don ' t know why National Geographic has done this , they ' ve never done this before , but they ' re allowing me to show you a few images from a coverage that I ' ve just completed that is not published yet . 
National Geographic doesn ' t do this , so I ' m very excited to be able to share this with you . 
And what these images are -- you ' ll see them at the start of the slide show -- there ' s only about four images -- but it ' s of a little bear that lives in the Great Bear Rainforest . 
It ' s pure white , but it ' s not a polar bear . 
It ' s a spirit bear , or a Kermode bear . 
There are only 200 of these bears left . 
They ' re more rare than the panda bear . 
I sat there on the river for two months without seeing one . 
I thought , my career ' s over . 
I proposed this stupid story to National Geographic . 
What in the heck was I thinking ? 
So I had two months to sit there and figure out different ways of what I was going to do in my next life , after I was a photographer , because they were going to fire me . 
Because National Geographic is a magazine ; they remind us all the time : they publish pictures , not excuses . 
( Laughter ) And after two months of sitting there -- one day , thinking that it was all over , this incredible big white male came down , right beside me , three feet away from me , and he went down and grabbed a fish and went off in the forest and ate it . 
And then I spent the entire day living my childhood dream of walking around with this bear through the forest . 
He went through this old-growth forest and sat up beside this 400-year-old culturally modified tree and went to sleep . 
And I actually got to sleep within three feet of him , just in the forest , and photograph him . 
So I ' m very excited to be able to show you those images and a cross-section of my work that I ' ve done on the polar regions . 
Please enjoy . 
( Music ) Brandi Carlile : ♫ Have you ever wandered lonely through the woods ? ♫ ♫ And everything there feels just as it should ♫ ♫ You ' re part of the life there ♫ ♫ You ' re part of something good ♫ ♫ If you ' ve ever wandered lonely through the woods ♫ ♫ Ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh ♫ ♫ If you ' ve ever wandered lonely through the woods ♫ ♫ Have you ever stared into a starry sky ? ♫ ♫ Lying on your back , you ' re asking why ♫ ♫ What ' s the purpose ? ♫ ♫ I wonder , who am I ? ♫ ♫ If you ' ve ever stared into a starry sky ♫ ♫ Ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh ♫ ♫ Aah , ah , aah ♫ ♫ Ah , oh , oh , ah , ah , oh , oh ♫ ♫ Have you ever stared into a starry sky ? ♫ ♫ Have you ever been out walking in the snow ? ♫ ♫ Tried to get back where you were before ♫ ♫ You always end up ♫ ♫ Not knowing where to go ♫ ♫ If you ' ve ever been out walking in the snow ♫ ♫ Ooh , ooh , ooh , ooh ♫ ♫ Aah , ah , aah , ah , aah ♫ ♫ Ah , ah , oh , ah , ah , oh , ah ♫ ♫ Oh , ah , ah , ah ♫ ♫ Ah , ah , oh , ah , ah , oh , oh ♫ ♫ If you ' d ever been out walking you would know ♫ ( Applause ) Paul Nicklen : Thank you very much. The show ' s not over . 
My clock is ticking. OK , let ' s stop . 
Thank you very much. I appreciate it . 
We ' re inundated with news all the time that the sea ice is disappearing and it ' s at its lowest level . 
And in fact , scientists were originally saying sea ice is going to disappear in the next hundred years , then they said 50 years . 
Now they ' re saying the sea ice in the Arctic , the summertime extent is going to be gone in the next four to 10 years . 
And what does that mean ? 
After a while of reading this in the news , it just becomes news . 
You glaze over with it . 
And what I ' m trying to do with my work is put faces to this . 
And I want people to understand and get the concept that , if we lose ice , we stand to lose an entire ecosystem . 
Projections are that we could lose polar bears , they could become extinct in the next 50 to 100 years . 
And there ' s no better , sexier , more beautiful , charismatic megafauna species for me to hang my campaign on . 
Polar bears are amazing hunters . 
This was a bear I sat with for a while on the shores . 
There was no ice around . 
But this glacier caved into the water and a seal got on it . 
And this bear swam out to that seal -- 800 lb. bearded seal -- grabbed it , swam back and ate it . 
And he was so full , he was so happy and so fat eating this seal , that , as I approached him -- about 20 feet away -- to get this picture , his only defense was to keep eating more seal . 
And as he ate , he was so full -- he probably had about 200 lbs of meat in his belly -- and as he ate inside one side of his mouth , he was regurgitating out the other side of his mouth . 
So as long as these bears have any bit of ice they will survive , but it ' s the ice that ' s disappearing . 
We ' re finding more and more dead bears in the Arctic . 
When I worked on polar bears as a biologist 20 years ago , we never found dead bears . 
And in the last four or five years , we ' re finding dead bears popping up all over the place . 
We ' re seeing them in the Beaufort Sea , floating in the open ocean where the ice has melted out . 
I found a couple in Norway last year. We ' re seeing them on the ice . 
These bears are already showing signs of the stress of disappearing ice . 
Here ' s a mother and her two year-old cub were traveling on a ship a hundred miles offshore in the middle of nowhere , and they ' re riding on this big piece of glacier ice , which is great for them ; they ' re safe at this point . 
They ' re not going to die of hypothermia . 
They ' re going to get to land . 
But unfortunately , 95 percent of the glaciers in the Arctic are also receding right now to the point that the ice is ending up on land and not injecting any ice back into the ecosystem . 
These ringed seals , these are the " fatsicles " of the Arctic . 
These little , fat dumplings , 150-pound bundles of blubber are the mainstay of the polar bear . 
And they ' re not like the harbor seals that you have here . 
These ringed seals also live out their entire life cycle associated and connected to sea ice . 
They give birth inside the ice , and they feed on the Arctic cod that live under the ice . 
And here ' s a picture of sick ice . 
This is a piece of multi-year ice that ' s 12 years old . 
And what scientists didn ' t predict is that , as this ice melts , these big pockets of black water are forming and they ' re grabbing the sun ' s energy and accelerating the melting process . 
And here we are diving in the Beaufort Sea . 
The visibility ' s 600 ft. ; we ' re on our safety lines ; the ice is moving all over the place . 
I wish I could spend half an hour telling you about how we almost died on this dive . 
But what ' s important in this picture is that you have a piece of multi-year ice , that big chunk of ice up in the corner . 
In that one single piece of ice , you have 300 species of microorganisms . 
And in the spring , when the sun returns to the ice , it forms the phytoplankton , grows under that ice , and then you get bigger sheets of seaweed , and then you get the zooplankton feeding on all that life . 
So really what the ice does is it acts like a garden . 
It acts like the soil in a garden. It ' s an inverted garden . 
Losing that ice is like losing the soil in a garden . 
Here ' s me in my office . 
I hope you appreciate yours . 
This is after an hour under the ice . 
I can ' t feel my lips ; my face is frozen ; I can ' t feel my hands ; I can ' t feel my feet . 
And I ' ve come up , and all I wanted to do was get out of the water . 
After an hour in these conditions , it ' s so extreme that , when I go down , almost every dive I vomit into my regulator because my body can ' t deal with the stress of the cold on my head . 
And so I ' m just so happy that the dive is over . 
I get to hand my camera to my assistant , and I ' m looking up at him , and I ' m going , " Woo. Woo. Woo. " 
Which means , " Take my camera. " 
And he thinks I ' m saying , " Take my picture. " 
So we had this little communication breakdown . 
( Laughter ) But it ' s worth it . 
I ' m going to show you pictures of beluga whales , bowhead whales , and narwhals , and polar bears , and leopard seals today , but this picture right here means more to me than any other I ' ve ever made . 
I dropped down in this ice hole , just through that hole that you just saw , and I looked up under the underside of the ice , and I was dizzy ; I thought I had vertigo . 
I got very nervous -- no rope , no safety line , the whole world is moving around me -- and I thought , " I ' m in trouble. " 
But what happened is that the entire underside was full of these billions of amphipods and copepods moving around and feeding on the underside of the ice , giving birth and living out their entire life cycle . 
This is the foundation of the whole food chain in the Arctic , right here . 
And when you have low productivity in this , in ice , the productivity in copepods go down . 
This is a bowhead whale . 
Supposedly , science is stating that it could be the oldest living animal on earth right now . 
This very whale right here could be over 250 years old . 
This whale could have been born around the start of the Industrial Revolution . 
It could have survived 150 years of whaling . 
And now its biggest threat is the disappearance of ice in the North because of the lives that we ' re leading in the South . 
Narwhals , these majestic narwhals with their eight-foot long ivory tusks , don ' t have to be here ; they could be out on the open water . 
But they ' re forcing themselves to come up in these tiny little ice holes where they can breathe , catch a breath , because right under that ice are all the swarms of cod . 
And the cod are there because they are feeding on all the copepods and amphipods . 
Alright , my favorite part . 
When I ' m on my deathbed , I ' m going to remember one story more than any other . 
Even though that spirit bear moment was powerful , I don ' t think I ' ll ever have another experience like I did with these leopard seals . 
Leopard seals , since the time of Shackleton , have had a bad reputation . 
They ' ve got that wryly smile on their mouth . 
They ' ve got those black sinister eyes and those spots on their body . 
They look positively prehistoric and a bit scary . 
And tragically in [ 2003 ] , a scientist was taken down and drowned , and she was being consumed by a leopard seal . 
And people were like , " We knew they were vicious. We knew they were. " 
And so people love to form their opinions . 
And that ' s when I got a story idea : I want to go to Antarctica , get in the water with as many leopard seals as I possibly can and give them a fair shake -- find out if they really are these vicious animals , or if they ' re misunderstood . 
So this is that story . 
Oh , and they also happen to eat Happy Feet . 
( Laughter ) As a species , as humans , we like to say penguins are really cute , therefore , leopard seals eat them , so leopard seals are ugly and bad . 
It doesn ' t work that way . 
The penguin doesn ' t know it ' s cute , and the leopard seal doesn ' t know it ' s kind of big and monstrous . 
This is just the food chain unfolding . 
They ' re also big . 
They ' re not these little harbor seals . 
They are 12 ft. long , a thousand pounds . 
And they ' re also curiously aggressive . 
You get 12 tourists packed into a Zodiac , floating in these icy waters , and a leopard seal comes up and bites the pontoon . 
The boat starts to sink , they race back to the ship and get to go home and tell the stories of how they got attacked . 
All the leopard seal was doing -- it ' s just biting a balloon . 
It just sees this big balloon in the ocean -- it doesn ' t have hands -- it ' s going to take a little bite , the boat pops , and off they go . 
( Laughter ) So after five days of crossing the Drake Passage -- isn ' t that beautiful -- after five days of crossing the Drake Passage , we have finally arrived at Antarctica . 
I ' m with my Swedish assistant and guide . 
His name is Goran Ehlme from Sweden -- Goran . 
And he has a lot of experience with leopard seals. I have never seen one . 
So we come around the cove in our little Zodiac boat , and there ' s this monstrous leopard seal . 
And even in his voice , he goes , " That ' s a bloody big seal , ya. " 
( Laughter ) And this seal is taking this penguin by the head , and it ' s flipping it back and forth . 
And what it ' s trying to do is turn that penguin inside-out , so it can eat the meat off the bones , and then it goes off and gets another one . 
And so this leopard seal grabbed another penguin , came under the boat , the Zodiac , starting hitting the hull of the boat . 
And we ' re trying to not fall in the water . 
And we sit down , and that ' s when Goran said to me , " This is a good seal , ya . 
It ' s time for you to get in the water. " 
( Laughter ) And I looked at Goran , and I said to him , " Forget that. " 
But I think I probably used a different word starting with the letter " F. " 
But he was right . 
He scolded me out , and said , " This is why we ' re here . 
And you purposed this stupid story to National Geographic . 
And now you ' ve got to deliver . 
And you can ' t publish excuses. " 
So I had such dry mouth -- probably not as bad as now -- but I had such , such dry mouth . 
And my legs were just trembling. I couldn ' t feel my legs . 
I put my flippers on. I could barely part my lips . 
I put my snorkel in my mouth , and I rolled over the side of the Zodiac into the water . 
And this was the first thing she did . 
She came racing up to me , engulfed my whole camera -- and her teeth are up here and down here -- but Goran , before I had gotten in the water , had given me amazing advice . 
He said , " If you get scared , you close your eyes , ya , and she ' ll go away. " 
( Laughter ) So that ' s all I had to work with at that point . 
But I just started to shoot these pictures . 
So she did this threat display for a few minutes , and then the most amazing thing happened -- she totally relaxed . 
She went off , she got a penguin . 
She stopped about 10 feet away from me , and she sat there with this penguin , the penguin ' s flapping , and she let ' s it go . 
The penguin swims toward me , takes off . 
She grabs another one. She does this over and over . 
And it dawned on me that she ' s trying to feed me a penguin . 
Why else would she release these penguins at me ? 
And after she did this four or five times , she swam by me with this dejected look on her face . 
You don ' t want to be too anthropomorphic , but I swear that she looked at me like , " This useless predator ' s going to starve in my ocean. " 
( Laughter ) So realizing I couldn ' t catch swimming penguins , she ' d get these other penguins and bring them slowly towards me , bobbing like this , and she ' d let them go . 
This didn ' t work . 
I was laughing so hard and so emotional that my mask was flooding , because I was crying underwater , just because it was so amazing . 
And so that didn ' t work . 
So then she ' d get another penguin and try this ballet-like sexy display sliding down this iceberg like this. ( Laughter ) And she would sort of bring them over to me and offer it to me . 
This went on for four days . 
This just didn ' t happen a couple of times . 
And then so she realized I couldn ' t catch live ones , so she brought me dead penguins . 
( Laughter ) Now I ' ve got four or five penguins floating around my head , and I ' m just sitting there shooting away . 
And she would often stop and have this dejected look on her face like , " Are you for real ? " 
Because she can ' t believe I can ' t eat this penguin . 
Because in her world , you ' re either breeding or you ' re eating -- and I ' m not breeding , so ... 
( Laughter ) And then that wasn ' t enough ; she started to flip penguins onto my head . 
She was trying to force-feed me. She ' s pushing me around . 
She ' s trying to force-feed my camera , which is every photographer ' s dream . 
And she would get frustrated ; she ' d blow bubbles in my face . 
She would , I think , let me know that I was going to starve . 
But yet she didn ' t stop . 
She would not stop trying to feed me penguins . 
And on the last day with this female where I thought I had pushed her too far , I got nervous because she came up to me , she rolled over on her back , and she did this deep , guttural jackhammer sound , this gok-gok-gok-gok . 
And I thought , she ' s about to bite . 
She ' s about to let me know she ' s too frustrated with me . 
What had happened was another seal had snuck in behind me , and she did that to threat display . 
She chased that big seal away , went and got its penguin and brought it to me . 
( Laughter ) That wasn ' t the only seal I got in the water with . 
I got in the water with 30 other leopard seals , and I never once had a scary encounter . 
They are the most remarkable animals I ' ve ever worked with , and the same with polar bears . 
And just like the polar bears , these animals depend on an icy environment . 
I get emotional. Sorry . 
It ' s a story that lives deep in my heart , and I ' m proud to share this with you . 
And I ' m so passionate about it . 
Anybody want to come with me to Antarctica or the Arctic , I ' ll take you ; let ' s go . 
We ' ve got to get the story out now. Thank you very much . 
( Applause ) Thank you . 
( Applause ) Thank you. Thanks very much . 
Think about your day for a second . 
You woke up , felt fresh air on your face as you walked out the door , encountered new colleagues and had great discussions and felt in awe when you found something new . 
But I bet there ' s something you didn ' t think about today , something so close to home , you probably don ' t think about it very often at all . 
And that ' s that all those sensations , feelings , decisions and actions are mediated by the computer in your head called your brain . 
Now , the brain may not look like much from the outside -- a couple pounds of pinkish-gray flesh , amorphous . 
But the last 100 years of neuroscience have allowed us to zoom in on the brain and to see the intricacy of what lies within . 
And they ' ve told us that this brain is an incredibly complicated circuit made out of hundreds of billions of cells called neurons . 
Now , unlike a human-designed computer , where there ' s a fairly small number of different parts , and we know how they work because we humans designed them , the brain is made out of thousands of different kinds of cells , maybe tens of thousands . 
They come in different shapes ; they ' re made out of different molecules ; they project and connect to different brain regions . 
They also change in different ways in different disease states . 
Let ' s make it concrete . 
There ' s a class of cells , a fairly small cell , an inhibitory cell , that quiets its neighbors . 
It ' s one of the cells that seems to be atrophied in disorders like schizophrenia . 
It ' s called the basket cell . 
And this cell is one of the thousands of kinds of cell that we ' re learning about . 
New ones are being discovered every day . 
As just a second example : these pyramidal cells , large cells , can span a significant fraction of the brain . 
They ' re excitatory . 
And these are some of the cells that might be overactive in disorders such as epilepsy . 
Every one of these cells is an incredible electrical device . 
They receive inputs from thousands of upstream partners and compute their own electrical outputs , which then , if they pass a certain threshold , will go to thousands of downstream partners . 
And this process , which takes just a millisecond or so , happens thousands of times a minute in every one of your 100 billion cells , as long as you live and think and feel . 
So how are we going to figure out what this circuit does ? 
Ideally , we could go through this circuit and turn these different kinds of cell on and off and see whether we could figure out which ones contribute to certain functions and which ones go wrong in certain pathologies . 
If we could activate cells , we could see what powers they can unleash , what they can initiate and sustain . 
If we could turn them off , then we could try and figure out what they ' re necessary for . 
And that ' s the story I ' m going to tell you about today . 
And honestly , where we ' ve gone through over the last 11 years , through an attempt to find ways of turning circuits and cells and parts and pathways of the brain on and off , both to understand the science and also to confront some of the issues that face us all as humans . 
Now , before I tell you about the technology , the bad news is that a significant fraction of us in this room , if we live long enough , will encounter , perhaps , a brain disorder . 
Already , a billion people have had some kind of brain disorder that incapacitates them . 
The numbers don ' t do it justice , though . 
These disorders -- schizophrenia , Alzheimer ' s , depression , addiction -- they not only steal away our time to live , they change who we are . 
They take our identity and change our emotions and change who we are as people . 
Now , in the 20th century , there was some hope that was generated through the development of pharmaceuticals for treating brain disorders . 
And while many drugs have been developed that can alleviate symptoms of brain disorders , practically none of them can be considered to be cured . 
In part , that ' s because , if you think about it , we ' re bathing the brain in a chemical -- this elaborate circuit , made of thousands of different kinds of cell -- is being bathed in a substance . 
That ' s also why most of the drugs , not all , on the market can present some kind of serious side effect too . 
Now some people have gotten some solace from electrical stimulators that are implanted in the brain , for Parkinson ' s disease or cochlear implants . 
These have indeed been able to bring some kind of remedy to people with certain kinds of disorders . 
But electricity also will go in all directions -- the path of least resistance -- which is where that phrase , in part , comes from , and will also affect normal circuits , as well as the abnormal ones you want to fix . 
So again , we ' re sent back to the idea of ultraprecise control : Could we dial in information precisely where we want it to go ? 
So , when I started in neuroscience 11 years ago -- I had trained as an electrical engineer and a physicist -- the first thing I thought about was , if these neurons are electrical devices , all we need to do is to find some way of driving those electrical changes at a distance . 
If we could turn on the electricity in one cell but not its neighbors , that ' d give us the tool to activate and shut down these different cells to figure out what they do and how they contribute to the networks in which they ' re embedded . 
It would also allow us to have the ultraprecise control we need to fix the circuit computations that have gone awry . 
Now , how are we going to do that ? 
Well , there are many molecules that exist in nature which are able to convert light into electricity . 
You can think of them as little proteins that are like solar cells . 
If we install these molecules in neurons somehow , then these neurons would become electrically drivable with light , and their neighbors , which don ' t have this molecule , would not . 
There ' s one other magic trick you need to make this happen : the ability to get light into the brain . 
The brain doesn ' t feel pain . 
Taking advantage of all the effort that ' s gone into the internet , telecommunications , etc. , you can put optical fibers connected to lasers to activate -- in animal models , for example , in preclinical studies -- these neurons and see what they do . 
So how do we do this ? 
Around 2004 , in collaboration with Georg Nagel and Karl Deisseroth , this vision came to fruition . 
There ' s a certain alga that swims in the wild , and it needs to navigate towards light in order to photosynthesize optimally . 
And it senses light with a little eyespot , which works not unlike how our eye works . 
In its membrane , or its boundary , it contains little proteins that indeed can convert light into electricity . 
These molecules are called channelrhodopsins . 
And each of these proteins acts just like that solar cell that I told you about . 
When blue light hits it , it opens a little hole and allows charged particles to enter the eyespot ; that allows this eyespot to have an electrical signal , just like a solar cell charging a battery . 
So what we need to do is take these molecules and somehow install them in neurons . 
And because it ' s a protein , it ' s encoded for in the DNA of this organism . 
So all we ' ve got to do is take that DNA , put it into a gene therapy vector , like a virus , and put it into neurons . 
And this was a very productive time in gene therapy , and lots of viruses were coming along , so this turned out to be fairly simple . 
Early in the morning one day in the summer of 2004 , we gave it a try , and it worked on the first try . 
You take this DNA and put it into the neuron . 
The neuron uses its natural protein-making machinery to fabricate these little light-sensitive proteins and install them all over the cell , like putting solar panels on a roof . 
And the next thing you know , you have a neuron which can be activated with light . 
So this is very powerful . 
One of the tricks you have to do is figure out how to deliver these genes to the cells you want and not all the other neighbors . 
And you can do that ; you can tweak the viruses so they hit some cells and not others . 
And there ' s other genetic tricks you can play in order to get light-activated cells . 
This field has now come to be known as " optogenetics. " 
And just as one example of the kind of thing you can do , you can take a complex network , use one of these viruses to deliver the gene just to one kind of cell in this dense network . 
And then when you shine light on the entire network , just that cell type will be activated . 
For example , let ' s consider that basket cell I told you about earlier , the one that ' s atrophied in schizophrenia and the one that is inhibitory . 
If we can deliver that gene to these cells -- they won ' t be altered by the expression of the gene , of course -- then flash blue light over the entire brain network , just these cells are going to be driven . 
And when the light turns off , these cells go back to normal ; there don ' t seem to be adverse events . 
Not only can you study what these cells do , what their power is in computing in the brain , you can also use this to try to figure out if we could jazz up the activity of these cells if indeed , they ' re atrophied . 
I want to tell you some short stories about how we ' re using this both at the scientific clinical and preclinical levels . 
One of the questions that we ' ve confronted is : What signals in the brain mediate the sensation of reward ? 
Because if you could find those , those would be some of the signals that could drive learning ; the brain will do more of what got that reward . 
These are also signals that go awry in disorders such as addiction . 
So if we could figure out what cells they are , we could maybe find new targets for which drugs can be designed or screened against or maybe places where electrodes could be put in for people who have severe disability . 
To do that , we came up with a very simple paradigm in collaboration with the Fiorillo group , where , if the animal goes to one side of this little box , it gets a pulse of light . 
And we ' ll make different cells in the brain sensitive to light . 
If these cells can mediate reward , the animal should go there more and more . 
And that ' s what happens . 
The animal goes to the right-hand side and pokes his nose there and gets a flash of blue light every time he does it . 
He ' ll do that hundreds of times . 
These are the dopamine neurons , in some of the pleasure centers in the brain . 
We ' ve shown that a brief activation of these is enough to drive learning . 
Now we can generalize the idea . 
Instead of one point in the brain , we can devise devices that span the brain , that can deliver light into three-dimensional patterns -- arrays of optical fibers , each coupled to its own independent miniature light source . 
Then we can try to do things in vivo that have only been done to date in a dish , like high-throughput screening throughout the entire brain for the signals that can cause certain things to happen or that could be good clinical targets for treating brain disorders . 
One story I want to tell you about is : How can we find targets for treating post-traumatic stress disorder , a form of uncontrolled anxiety and fear ? 
One of the things that we did was to adopt a very classical model of fear . 
This goes back to the Pavlovian days . 
It ' s called Pavlovian fear conditioning , where a tone ends with a brief shock . 
The shock isn ' t painful , but it ' s a little annoying . 
And over time -- in this case , a mouse , which is a good animal model , commonly used in such experiments -- the animal learns to fear the tone . 
It will react by freezing , sort of like a deer in the headlights . 
Now the question is : What targets in the brain can we find that allow us to overcome this fear ? 
So we play that tone again , after it ' s been associated with fear . 
But we activate different targets in the brain , using that optical fiber array I showed on the previous slide , in order to try and figure out which targets can cause the brain to overcome that memory of fear . 
This brief video shows you one of these targets that we ' re working on now . 
This is an area in the prefrontal cortex , a region where we can use cognition to try to overcome aversive emotional states . 
The animal hears a tone. A flash of light occurs . 
There ' s no audio , but you see that the animal freezes -- the tone used to mean bad news . 
There ' s a little clock in the lower left-hand corner . 
You can see the animal is about two minutes into this . 
This next clip is just eight minutes later . 
And the same tone is going to play , and the light is going to flash again . 
OK , there it goes. Right ... now . 
And now you can see , just 10 minutes into the experiment , that we ' ve equipped the brain , by photoactivating this area , to overcome the expression of this fear memory . 
Over the last couple years , we ' ve gone back to the tree of life , because we wanted to find ways to turn circuits in the brain off . 
If we could do that , this could be extremely powerful . 
If you can delete cells for a few milliseconds or seconds , you can figure out what role they play in the circuits in which they ' re embedded . 
We surveyed organisms from all over the tree of life -- every kingdom of life but animals ; we see slightly differently . 
We found molecules called halorhodopsins or archaerhodopsins , that respond to green and yellow light . 
And they do the opposite of the molecule I told you about before , with the blue light activator , channelrhodopsin . 
Let ' s give an example of where we think this is going to go . 
Consider , for example , a condition like epilepsy , where the brain is overactive . 
Now , if drugs fail in epileptic treatment , one of the strategies is to remove part of the brain , but that ' s irreversible , and there could be side effects . 
What if we could just turn off that brain for the brief amount of time until the seizure dies away , and cause the brain to be restored to its initial state , like a dynamical system that ' s being coaxed down into a stable state ? 
This animation tries to explain this concept where we made these cells sensitive to being turned off with light , and we beam light in , and just for the time it takes to shut down a seizure , we ' re hoping to be able to turn it off . 
We don ' t have data to show you on this front , but we ' re very excited about this . 
I want to close on one story , which we think is another possibility , which is that maybe these molecules , if you can do ultraprecise control , can be used in the brain itself to make a new kind of prosthetic , an optical prosthetic . 
I already told you that electrical stimulators are not uncommon . 
Seventy-five thousand people have Parkinson ' s deep-brain stimulators implanted , maybe 100,000 people have cochlear implants , which allow them to hear . 
Another thing -- you ' ve got to get these genes into cells . 
A new hope in gene therapy has been developed , because viruses like the adeno-associated virus -- which probably most of us around this room have ; it doesn ' t have any symptoms -- have been used in hundreds of patients to deliver genes into the brain or the body . 
And so far , there have not been serious adverse events associated with the virus . 
There ' s one last elephant in the room : the proteins themselves , which come from algae , bacteria and funguses and all over the tree of life . 
Most of us don ' t have funguses or algae in our brains , so what will our brain do if we put that in ? 
Will the cells tolerate it ? Will the immune system react ? 
It ' s early -- these haven ' t been done in humans yet -- but we ' re working on a variety of studies to examine this . 
So far , we haven ' t seen overt reactions of any severity to these molecules or to the illumination of the brain with light . 
So it ' s early days , to be upfront , but we ' re excited about it . 
I wanted to close with one story , which we think could potentially be a clinical application . 
Now , there are many forms of blindness where the photoreceptors -- light sensors in the back of our eye -- are gone . 
And the retina is a complex structure . 
Let ' s zoom in on it so we can see it in more detail . 
The photoreceptor cells are shown here at the top . 
The signals that are detected by the photoreceptors are transformed via various computations until finally , the layer of cells at the bottom , the ganglion cells , relay the information to the brain , where we see that as perception . 
In many forms of blindness , like retinitis pigmentosa or macular degeneration , the photoreceptor cells have atrophied or been destroyed . 
Now , how could you repair this ? 
It ' s not even clear that a drug could cause this to be restored , since there ' s nothing for the drug to bind to . 
On the other hand , light can still get into the eye . 
The eye is still transparent and you can get light in . 
So what if we could take these channelrhodopsins and other molecules and install them on some of these other spared cells and convert them into little cameras ? 
And because there are so many of these cells in the eye , potentially , they could be very high-resolution cameras . 
This is some work that we ' re doing , led by one of our collaborators , Alan Horsager at USC , and being sought to be commercialized by a start-up company , Eos Neuroscience , which is funded by the NIH . 
What you see here is a mouse trying to solve a six-arm maze . 
There ' s a bit of water to motivate the mouse to move or he ' ll just sit there . 
The goal of this maze is to get out of the water and go to a little platform that ' s under the lit top port . 
Mice are smart , so this one solves the maze eventually , but he does a brute-force search . 
He ' s swimming down every avenue until he finally gets to the platform . 
He ' s not using vision to do it . 
These different mice are different mutations that recapitulate different kinds of blindness that affect humans . 
So we ' re being careful in trying to look at these different models so we come up with a generalized approach . 
So how can we solve this ? 
We ' ll do exactly what we outlined in the previous slide . 
We ' ll take these blue light photo sensors and install them onto a layer of cells in the middle of the retina in the back of the eye and convert them into a camera -- just like installing solar cells all over those neurons to make them light-sensitive . 
Light is converted to electricity on them . 
So this mouse was blind a couple weeks before this experiment and received one dose of this photosensitive molecule on a virus . 
And now you can see , the animal can indeed avoid walls and go to this little platform and make cognitive use of its eyes again . 
And to point out the power of this : these animals can get to that platform just as fast as animals that have seen their entire lives . 
So this preclinical study , I think , bodes hope for the kinds of things we ' re hoping to do in the future . 
We ' re also exploring new business models for this new field of neurotechnology . 
We ' re developing tools and sharing them freely with hundreds of groups all over the world for them to study and try to treat different disorders . 
Our hope is that by figuring out brain circuits at a level of abstraction that lets us repair them and engineer them , we can take some of these intractable disorders I mentioned earlier , practically none of which are cured , and in the 21st century , make them history . 
( Applause ) Juan Enriquez : So some of this stuff is a little dense . 
( Laughter ) But the implications of being able to control seizures or epilepsy with light instead of drugs and being able to target those specifically is a first step . 
The second thing that I think I heard you say is you can now control the brain in two colors , like an on-off switch . 
Ed Boyden : That ' s right . 
JE : Which makes every impulse going through the brain a binary code . 
EB : Right . 
With blue light , we can drive information , and it ' s in the form of a one . 
And by turning things off , it ' s more or less a zero . 
Our hope is to eventually build brain coprocessors that work with the brain so we can augment functions in people with disabilities . 
JE : And in theory , that means that , as a mouse feels , smells , hears , touches , you can model it out as a string of ones and zeros . 
EB : Yeah. We ' re hoping to use this as a way of testing what neural codes can drive certain behaviors and certain thoughts and certain feelings and use that to understand more about the brain . 
JE : Does that mean that someday you could download memories and maybe upload them ? 
EB : That ' s something we ' re starting to work on very hard . 
We ' re now working on trying to tile the brain with recording elements , too , so we can record information and then drive information back in -- sort of computing what the brain needs in order to augment its information processing . 
JE : Well , that might change a couple things. Thank you . 
EB : Thank you . 
I ' m a pediatrician and an anesthesiologist , so I put children to sleep for a living . 
( Laughter ) And I ' m an academic , so I put audiences to sleep for free . 
( Laughter ) But what I actually mostly do is I manage the pain management service at the Packard Children ' s Hospital up at Stanford in Palo Alto . 
And it ' s from the experience from about 20 or 25 years of doing that that I want to bring to you the message this morning , that pain is a disease . 
Now most of the time , you think of pain as a symptom of a disease , and that ' s true most of the time . 
It ' s the symptom of a tumor or an infection or an inflammation or an operation . 
But about 10 percent of the time , after the patient has recovered from one of those events , pain persists . 
It persists for months and oftentimes for years , and when that happens , it is its own disease . 
And before I tell you about how it is that we think that happens and what we can do about it , I want to show you how it feels for my patients . 
So imagine , if you will , that I ' m stroking your arm with this feather , as I ' m stroking my arm right now . 
Now , I want you to imagine that I ' m stroking it with this . 
Please keep your seat . 
( Laughter ) A very different feeling . 
Now what does it have to do with chronic pain ? 
Imagine , if you will , these two ideas together . 
Imagine what your life would be like if I were to stroke it with this feather , but your brain was telling you that this is what you are feeling -- and that is the experience of my patients with chronic pain . 
In fact , imagine something even worse . 
Imagine I were to stroke your child ' s arm with this feather , and their brain [ was ] telling them that they were feeling this hot torch . 
That was the experience of my patient , Chandler , whom you see in the photograph . 
As you can see , she ' s a beautiful , young woman . 
She was 16 years old last year when I met her , and she aspired to be a professional dancer . 
And during the course of one of her dance rehearsals , she fell on her outstretched arm and sprained her wrist . 
Now you would probably imagine , as she did , that a wrist sprain is a trivial event in a person ' s life . 
Wrap it in an ACE bandage , take some ibuprofen for a week or two , and that ' s the end of the story . 
But in Chandler ' s case , that was the beginning of the story . 
This is what her arm looked like when she came to my clinic about three months after her sprain . 
You can see that the arm is discolored , purplish in color . 
It was cadaverically cold to the touch . 
The muscles were frozen , paralyzed -- dystonic is how we refer to that . 
The pain had spread from her wrist to her hands , to her fingertips , from her wrist up to her elbow , almost all the way to her shoulder . 
But the worst part was , not the spontaneous pain that was there 24 hours a day . 
The worst part was that she had allodynia , the medical term for the phenomenon that I just illustrated with the feather and with the torch . 
The lightest touch of her arm -- the touch of a hand , the touch even of a sleeve , of a garment , as she put it on -- caused excruciating , burning pain . 
How can the nervous system get this so wrong ? 
How can the nervous system misinterpret an innocent sensation like the touch of a hand and turn it into the malevolent sensation of the touch of the flame ? 
Well you probably imagine that the nervous system in the body is hardwired like your house . 
In your house , wires run in the wall , from the light switch to a junction box in the ceiling and from the junction box to the light bulb . 
And when you turn the switch on , the light goes on . 
And when you turn the switch off , the light goes off . 
So people imagine the nervous system is just like that . 
If you hit your thumb with a hammer , these wires in your arm -- that , of course , we call nerves -- transmit the information into the junction box in the spinal cord where new wires , new nerves , take the information up to the brain where you become consciously aware that your thumb is now hurt . 
But the situation , of course , in the human body is far more complicated than that . 
Instead of it being the case that that junction box in the spinal cord is just simple where one nerve connects with the next nerve by releasing these little brown packets of chemical information called neurotransmitters in a linear one-on-one fashion , in fact , what happens is the neurotransmitters spill out in three dimensions -- laterally , vertically , up and down in the spinal cord -- and they start interacting with other adjacent cells . 
These cells , called glial cells , were once thought to be unimportant structural elements of the spinal cord that did nothing more than hold all the important things together , like the nerves . 
But it turns out the glial cells have a vital role in the modulation , amplification and , in the case of pain , the distortion of sensory experiences . 
These glial cells become activated . 
Their DNA starts to synthesize new proteins , which spill out and interact with adjacent nerves , and they start releasing their neurotransmitters , and those neurotransmitters spill out and activate adjacent glial cells , and so on and so forth , until what we have is a positive feedback loop . 
It ' s almost as if somebody came into your home and rewired your walls so that the next time you turned on the light switch , the toilet flushed three doors down , or your dishwasher went on , or your computer monitor turned off . 
That ' s crazy , but that ' s , in fact , what happens with chronic pain . 
And that ' s why pain becomes its own disease . 
The nervous system has plasticity . 
It changes , and it morphs in response to stimuli . 
Well , what do we do about that ? 
What can we do in a case like Chandler ' s ? 
We treat these patients in a rather crude fashion at this point in time . 
We treat them with symptom-modifying drugs -- painkillers -- which are , frankly , not very effective for this kind of pain . 
We take nerves that are noisy and active that should be quiet , and we put them to sleep with local anesthetics . 
And most importantly , what we do is we use a rigorous , and often uncomfortable , process of physical therapy and occupational therapy to retrain the nerves in the nervous system to respond normally to the activities and sensory experiences that are part of everyday life . 
And we support all of that with an intensive psychotherapy program to address the despondency , despair and depression that always accompanies severe , chronic pain . 
It ' s successful , as you can see from this video of Chandler , who , two months after we first met her , is now doings a back flip . 
And I had lunch with her yesterday because she ' s a college student studying dance at Long Beach here , and she ' s doing absolutely fantastic . 
But the future is actually even brighter . 
The future holds the promise that new drugs will be developed that are not symptom-modifying drugs that simply mask the problem , as we have now , but that will be disease-modifying drugs that will actually go right to the root of the problem and attack those glial cells , or those pernicious proteins that the glial cells elaborate , that spill over and cause this central nervous system wind-up , or plasticity , that so is capable of distorting and amplifying the sensory experience that we call pain . 
So I have hope that in the future , the prophetic words of George Carlin will be realized , who said , " My philosophy : No pain , no pain. " 
Thank you very much . 
Many believe driving is an activity solely reserved for those who can see . 
A blind person driving a vehicle safely and independently was thought to be an impossible task , until now . 
Hello , my name is Dennis Hong , and we ' re bringing freedom and independence to the blind by building a vehicle for the visually impaired . 
So before I talk about this car for the blind , let me briefly tell you about another project that I worked on called the DARPA Urban Challenge . 
Now this was about building a robotic car that can drive itself . 
You press start , nobody touches anything , and it can reach its destination fully autonomously . 
So in 2007 , our team won half a million dollars by placing third place in this competition . 
So about that time , the National Federation of the Blind , or NFB , challenged the research committee about who can develop a car that lets a blind person drive safely and independently . 
We decided to give it a try , because we thought , " Hey , how hard could it be ? " 
We have already an autonomous vehicle . 
We just put a blind person in it and we ' re done , right ? 
( Laughter ) We couldn ' t have been more wrong . 
What NFB wanted was not a vehicle that can drive a blind person around , but a vehicle where a blind person can make active decisions and drive . 
So we had to throw everything out the window and start from scratch . 
So to test this crazy idea , we developed a small dune buggy prototype vehicle to test the feasibility . 
And in the summer of 2009 , we invited dozens of blind youth from all over the country and gave them a chance to take it for a spin . 
It was an absolutely amazing experience . 
But the problem with this car was it was designed to only be driven in a very controlled environment , in a flat , closed-off parking lot -- even the lanes defined by red traffic cones . 
So with this success , we decided to take the next big step , to develop a real car that can be driven on real roads . 
So how does it work ? 
Well , it ' s a rather complex system , but let me try to explain it , maybe simplify it . 
So we have three steps . 
We have perception , computation and non-visual interfaces . 
Now obviously the driver cannot see , so the system needs to perceive the environment and gather information for the driver . 
For that , we use an initial measurement unit . 
So it measures acceleration , angular acceleration -- like a human ear , inner ear . 
We fuse that information with a GPS unit to get an estimate of the location of the car . 
We also use two cameras to detect the lanes of the road . 
And we also use three laser range finders . 
The lasers scan the environment to detect obstacles -- a car approaching from the front , the back and also any obstacles that run into the roads , any obstacles around the vehicle . 
So all this vast amount of information is then fed into the computer , and the computer can do two things . 
One is , first of all , process this information to have an understanding of the environment -- these are the lanes of the road , there ' s the obstacles -- and convey this information to the driver . 
The system is also smart enough to figure out the safest way to operate the car . 
So we can also generate instructions on how to operate the controls of the vehicle . 
But the problem is this : How do we convey this information and instructions to a person who cannot see fast enough and accurate enough so he can drive ? 
So for this , we developed many different types of non-visual user interface technology . 
So starting from a three-dimensional ping sound system , a vibrating vest , a click wheel with voice commands , a leg strip , even a shoe that applies pressure to the foot . 
But today we ' re going to talk about three of these non-visual user interfaces . 
Now the first interface is called a DriveGrip . 
So these are a pair of gloves , and it has vibrating elements on the knuckle part so you can convey instructions about how to steer -- the direction and the intensity . 
Another device is called SpeedStrip . 
So this is a chair -- as a matter of fact , it ' s actually a massage chair . 
We gut it out , and we rearrange the vibrating elements in different patterns , and we actuate them to convey information about the speed , and also instructions how to use the gas and the brake pedal . 
So over here , you can see how the computer understands the environment , and because you cannot see the vibration , we actually put red LED ' s on the driver so that you can see what ' s happening . 
This is the sensory data , and that data is transferred to the devices through the computer . 
So these two devices , DriveGrip and SpeedStrip , are very effective . 
But the problem is these are instructional cue devices . 
So this is not really freedom , right ? 
The computer tells you how to drive -- turn left , turn right , speed up , stop . 
We call this the " backseat-driver problem. " 
So we ' re moving away from the instructional cue devices , and we ' re now focusing more on the informational devices . 
A good example for this informational non-visual user interface is called AirPix . 
So think of it as a monitor for the blind . 
So it ' s a small tablet , has many holes in it , and compressed air comes out , so it can actually draw images . 
So even though you are blind , you can put your hand over it , you can see the lanes of the road and obstacles . 
Actually , you can also change the frequency of the air coming out and possibly the temperature . 
So it ' s actually a multi-dimensional user interface . 
So here you can see the left camera , the right camera from the vehicle and how the computer interprets that and sends that information to the AirPix . 
For this , we ' re showing a simulator , a blind person driving using the AirPix . 
This simulator was also very useful for training the blind drivers and also quickly testing different types of ideas for different types of non-visual user interfaces . 
So basically that ' s how it works . 
So just a month ago , on January 29th , we unveiled this vehicle for the very first time to the public at the world-famous Daytona International Speedway during the Rolex 24 racing event . 
We also had some surprises. Let ' s take a look . 
( Music ) ( Video ) Announcer : This is an historic day in January . 
He ' s coming up to the grandstand , fellow Federationists . 
( Cheering ) ( Honking ) There ' s the grandstand now . 
And he ' s [ unclear ] following that van that ' s out in front of him . 
Well there comes the first box . 
Now let ' s see if Mark avoids it . 
He does. He passes it on the right . 
Third box is out. The fourth box is out . 
And he ' s perfectly making his way between the two . 
He ' s closing in on the van to make the moving pass . 
Well this is what it ' s all about , this kind of dynamic display of audacity and ingenuity . 
He ' s approaching the end of the run , makes his way between the barrels that are set up there . 
( Honking ) ( Applause ) Dennis Hong : I ' m so happy for you . 
Mark ' s going to give me a ride back to the hotel . 
Mark Riccobono : Yes . 
( Applause ) DH : So since we started this project , we ' ve been getting hundreds of letters , emails , phone calls from people from all around the world . 
Letters thanking us , but sometimes you also get funny letters like this one : " Now I understand why there is Braille on a drive-up ATM machine. " 
( Laughter ) But sometimes -- ( Laughter ) But sometimes I also do get -- I wouldn ' t call it hate mail -- but letters of really strong concern : " Dr. Hong , are you insane , trying to put blind people on the road ? 
You must be out of your mind. " 
But this vehicle is a prototype vehicle , and it ' s not going to be on the road until it ' s proven as safe as , or safer than , today ' s vehicle . 
And I truly believe that this can happen . 
But still , will the society , would they accept such a radical idea ? 
How are we going to handle insurance ? 
How are we going to issue driver ' s licenses ? 
There ' s many of these different kinds of hurdles besides technology challenges that we need to address before this becomes a reality . 
Of course , the main goal of this project is to develop a car for the blind . 
But potentially more important than this is the tremendous value of the spin-off technology that can come from this project . 
The sensors that are used can see through the dark , the fog and rain . 
And together with this new type of interfaces , we can use these technologies and apply them to safer cars for sighted people . 
Or for the blind , everyday home appliances -- in the educational setting , in the office setting . 
Just imagine , in a classroom a teacher writes on the blackboard and a blind student can see what ' s written and read using these non-visual interfaces . 
This is priceless . 
So today , the things I ' ve showed you today , is just the beginning . 
Thank you very much . 
When I was growing up in Montana , I had two dreams . 
I wanted to be a paleontologist , a dinosaur paleontologist , and I wanted to have a pet dinosaur . 
And so that ' s what I ' ve been striving for all of my life . 
I was very fortunate early in my career . 
I was fortunate in finding things . 
I wasn ' t very good at reading things . 
In fact , I don ' t read much of anything . 
I am extremely dyslexic , and so reading is the hardest thing I do . 
But instead , I go out and I find things . 
Then I just pick things up . 
I basically practice for finding money on the street . 
( Laughter ) And I wander about the hills , and I have found a few things . 
And I have been fortunate enough to find things like the first eggs in the Western hemisphere and the first baby dinosaurs in nests , the first dinosaur embryos and massive accumulations of bones . 
And it happened to be at a time when people were just starting to begin to realize that dinosaurs weren ' t the big , stupid , green reptiles that people had thought for so many years . 
People were starting to get an idea that dinosaurs were special . 
And so , at that time , I was able to make some interesting hypotheses along with my colleagues . 
We were able to actually say that dinosaurs -- based on the evidence we had -- that dinosaurs built nests and lived in colonies and cared for their young , brought food to their babies and traveled in gigantic herds . 
So it was pretty interesting stuff . 
I have gone on to find more things and discover that dinosaurs really were very social . 
We have found a lot of evidence that dinosaurs changed from when they were juveniles to when they were adults . 
The appearance of them would have been different -- which it is in all social animals . 
In social groups of animals , the juveniles always look different than the adults . 
The adults can recognize the juveniles ; the juveniles can recognize the adults . 
And so we ' re making a better picture of what a dinosaur looks like . 
And they didn ' t just all chase Jeeps around . 
( Laughter ) But it is that social thing that I guess attracted Michael Crichton . 
And in his book , he talked about the social animals . 
And then Steven Spielberg , of course , depicts these dinosaurs as being very social creatures . 
The theme of this story is building a dinosaur , and so we come to that part of " Jurassic Park. " 
Michael Crichton really was one of the first people to talk about bringing dinosaurs back to life . 
You all know the story , right . 
I mean , I assume everyone here has seen " Jurassic Park. " 
If you want to make a dinosaur , you go out , you find yourself a piece of petrified tree sap -- otherwise known as amber -- that has some blood-sucking insects in it , good ones , and you get your insect and you drill into it and you suck out some DNA , because obviously all insects that sucked blood in those days sucked dinosaur DNA out . 
And you take your DNA back to the laboratory and you clone it . 
And I guess you inject it into maybe an ostrich egg , or something like that , and then you wait , and , lo and behold , out pops a little baby dinosaur . 
And everybody ' s happy about that . 
( Laughter ) And they ' re happy over and over again . 
They keep doing it ; they just keep making these things . 
And then , then , then , and then ... 
Then the dinosaurs , being social , act out their socialness , and they get together , and they conspire . 
And , of course , that ' s what makes Steven Spielberg ' s movie -- conspiring dinosaurs chasing people around . 
So I assume everybody knows that if you actually had a piece of amber and it had an insect in it , and you drilled into it , and you got something out of that insect , and you cloned it , and you did it over and over and over again , you ' d have a room full of mosquitos . 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) And probably a whole bunch of trees as well . 
Now if you want dinosaur DNA , I say go to the dinosaur . 
So that ' s what we ' ve done . 
Back in 1993 when the movie came out , we actually had a grant from the National Science Foundation to attempt to extract DNA from a dinosaur , and we chose the dinosaur on the left , a Tyrannosaurus rex , which was a very nice specimen . 
And one of my former doctoral students , Dr. Mary Schweitzer , actually had the background to do this sort of thing . 
And so she looked into the bone of this T. rex , one of the thigh bones , and she actually found some very interesting structures in there . 
They found these red circular-looking objects , and they looked , for all the world , like red blood cells . 
And they ' re in what appear to be the blood channels that go through the bone . 
And so she thought , well , what the heck . 
So she sampled some material out of it . 
Now it wasn ' t DNA ; she didn ' t find DNA . 
But she did find heme , which is the biological foundation of hemoglobin . 
And that was really cool . 
That was interesting . 
That was -- here we have 65-million-year-old heme . 
Well we tried and tried and we couldn ' t really get anything else out of it . 
So a few years went by , and then we started the Hell Creek Project . 
And the Hell Creek Project was this massive undertaking to get as many dinosaurs as we could possibly find , and hopefully find some dinosaurs that had more material in them . 
And out in eastern Montana there ' s a lot of space , a lot of badlands , and not very many people , and so you can go out there and find a lot of stuff . 
And we did find a lot of stuff . 
We found a lot of Tyrannosaurs , but we found one special Tyrannosaur , and we called it B-rex . 
And B-rex was found under a thousand cubic yards of rock . 
It wasn ' t a very complete T. rex , and it wasn ' t a very big T. rex , but it was a very special B-rex . 
And I and my colleagues cut into it , and we were able to determine , by looking at lines of arrested growth , some lines in it , that B-rex had died at the age of 16 . 
We don ' t really know how long dinosaurs lived , because we haven ' t found the oldest one yet . 
But this one died at the age of 16 . 
We gave samples to Mary Schweitzer , and she was actually able to determine that B-rex was a female based on medullary tissue found on the inside of the bone . 
Medullary tissue is the calcium build-up , the calcium storage basically , when an animal is pregnant , when a bird is pregnant . 
So here was the character that linked birds and dinosaurs . 
But Mary went further . 
She took the bone , and she dumped it into acid . 
Now we all know that bones are fossilized , and so if you dump it into acid , there shouldn ' t be anything left . 
But there was something left . 
There were blood vessels left . 
There were flexible , clear blood vessels . 
And so here was the first soft tissue from a dinosaur . 
It was extraordinary . 
But she also found osteocytes , which are the cells that laid down the bones . 
And try and try , we could not find DNA , but she did find evidence of proteins . 
But we thought maybe -- well , we thought maybe that the material was breaking down after it was coming out of the ground . 
We thought maybe it was deteriorating very fast . 
And so we built a laboratory in the back of an 18-wheeler trailer , and actually took the laboratory to the field where we could get better samples . 
And we did. We got better material . 
The cells looked better . 
The vessels looked better . 
Found the protein collagen . 
I mean , it was wonderful stuff . 
But it ' s not dinosaur DNA . 
So we have discovered that dinosaur DNA , and all DNA , just breaks down too fast . 
We ' re just not going to be able to do what they did in " Jurassic Park. " 
We ' re not going to be able to make a dinosaur based on a dinosaur . 
But birds are dinosaurs . 
Birds are living dinosaurs . 
We actually classify them as dinosaurs . 
We now call them non-avian dinosaurs and avian dinosaurs . 
So the non-avian dinosaurs are the big clunky ones that went extinct . 
Avian dinosaurs are our modern birds . 
So we don ' t have to make a dinosaur because we already have them . 
( Laughter ) I know , you ' re as bad as the sixth-graders . 
( Laughter ) The sixth-graders look at it and they say , " No. " 
( Laughter ) " You can call it a dinosaur , but look at the velociraptor : the velociraptor is cool. " 
( Laughter ) " The chicken is not. " 
( Laughter ) So this is our problem , as you can imagine . 
The chicken is a dinosaur . 
I mean it really is . 
You can ' t argue with it because we ' re the classifiers and we ' ve classified it that way . 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) But the sixth-graders demand it . 
" Fix the chicken. " 
( Laughter ) So that ' s what I ' m here to tell you about : how we are going to fix a chicken . 
So we have a number of ways that we actually can fix the chicken . 
Because evolution works , we actually have some evolutionary tools . 
We ' ll call them biological modification tools . 
We have selection . 
And we know selection works . 
We started out with a wolf-like creature and we ended up with a Maltese . 
I mean , that ' s -- that ' s definitely genetic modification . 
Or any of the other funny-looking little dogs . 
We also have transgenesis . 
Transgenesis is really cool too . 
That ' s where you take a gene out of one animal and stick it in another one . 
That ' s how people make GloFish . 
You take a glow gene out of a coral or a jellyfish and you stick it in a zebrafish , and , puff , they glow . 
And that ' s pretty cool . 
And they obviously make a lot of money off of them . 
And now they ' re making Glow-rabbits and Glow-all-sorts-of-things . 
I guess we could make a glow chicken . 
( Laughter ) But I don ' t think that ' ll satisfy the sixth-graders either . 
But there ' s another thing . 
There ' s what we call atavism activation . 
And atavism activation is basically -- an atavism is an ancestral characteristic . 
You heard that occasionally children are born with tails , and it ' s because it ' s an ancestral characteristic . 
And so there are a number of atavisms that can happen . 
Snakes are occasionally born with legs . 
And here ' s an example . 
This is a chicken with teeth . 
A fellow by the name of Matthew Harris at the University of Wisconsin in Madison actually figured out a way to stimulate the gene for teeth , and so was able to actually turn the tooth gene on and produce teeth in chickens . 
Now that ' s a good characteristic . 
We can save that one . 
We know we can use that . 
We can make a chicken with teeth . 
That ' s getting closer . 
That ' s better than a glowing chicken . 
( Laughter ) A friend of mine , a colleague of mine , Dr. Hans Larsson at McGill University , is actually looking at atavisms . 
And he ' s looking at them by looking at the embryo genesis of birds and actually looking at how they develop , and he ' s interested in how birds actually lost their tail . 
He ' s also interested in the transformation of the arm , the hand , to the wing . 
He ' s looking for those genes as well . 
And I said , " Well , if you can find those , I can just reverse them and make what I need to make for the sixth-graders. " 
And so he agreed . 
And so that ' s what we ' re looking into . 
If you look at dinosaur hands , a velociraptor has that cool-looking hand with the claws on it . 
Archaeopteryx , which is a bird , a primitive bird , still has that very primitive hand . 
But as you can see , the pigeon , or a chicken or anything else , another bird , has kind of a weird-looking hand , because the hand is a wing . 
But the cool thing is that , if you look in the embryo , as the embryo is developing the hand actually looks pretty much like the archaeopteryx hand . 
It has the three fingers , the three digits . 
But a gene turns on that actually fuses those together . 
And so what we ' re looking for is that gene . 
We want to stop that gene from turning on , fusing those hands together , so we can get a chicken that hatches out with a three-fingered hand , like the archaeopteryx . 
And the same goes for the tails . 
Birds have basically rudimentary tails . 
And so we know that in embryo , as the animal is developing , it actually has a relatively long tail . 
But a gene turns on and resorbs the tail , gets rid of it . 
So that ' s the other gene we ' re looking for . 
We want to stop that tail from resorbing . 
So what we ' re trying to do really is take our chicken , modify it and make the chickenosaurus . 
( Laughter ) It ' s a cooler-looking chicken . 
But it ' s just the very basics . 
So that really is what we ' re doing . 
And people always say , " Why do that ? 
Why make this thing ? 
What good is it ? " 
Well , that ' s a good question . 
Actually , I think it ' s a great way to teach kids about evolutionary biology and developmental biology and all sorts of things . 
And quite frankly , I think if Colonel Sanders was to be careful how he worded it , he could actually advertise an extra piece . 
( Laughter ) Anyway -- When our dino-chicken hatches , it will be , obviously , the poster child , or what you might call a poster chick , for technology , entertainment and design . 
A few years ago , I felt like I was stuck in a rut , so I decided to follow in the footsteps of the great American philosopher , Morgan Spurlock , and try something new for 30 days . 
The idea is actually pretty simple . 
Think about something you ' ve always wanted to add to your life and try it for the next 30 days . 
It turns out 30 days is just about the right amount of time to add a new habit or subtract a habit -- like watching the news -- from your life . 
There ' s a few things I learned while doing these 30-day challenges . 
The first was , instead of the months flying by , forgotten , the time was much more memorable . 
This was part of a challenge I did to take a picture every day for a month . 
And I remember exactly where I was and what I was doing that day . 
I also noticed that as I started to do more and harder 30-day challenges , my self-confidence grew . 
I went from desk-dwelling computer nerd to the kind of guy who bikes to work . 
For fun ! 
( Laughter ) Even last year , I ended up hiking up Mt. Kilimanjaro , the highest mountain in Africa . 
I would never have been that adventurous before I started my 30-day challenges . 
I also figured out that if you really want something badly enough , you can do anything for 30 days . 
Have you ever wanted to write a novel ? 
Every November , tens of thousands of people try to write their own 50,000 - word novel , from scratch , in 30 days . 
It turns out , all you have to do is write 1,667 words a day for a month . 
So I did . 
By the way , the secret is not to go to sleep until you ' ve written your words for the day . 
You might be sleep-deprived , but you ' ll finish your novel . 
Now is my book the next great American novel ? 
No. I wrote it in a month . 
It ' s awful . 
( Laughter ) But for the rest of my life , if I meet John Hodgman at a TED party , I don ' t have to say , " I ' m a computer scientist. " 
No , no , if I want to , I can say , " I ' m a novelist. " 
( Laughter ) So here ' s one last thing I ' d like to mention . 
I learned that when I made small , sustainable changes , things I could keep doing , they were more likely to stick . 
There ' s nothing wrong with big , crazy challenges . 
In fact , they ' re a ton of fun . 
But they ' re less likely to stick . 
When I gave up sugar for 30 days , day 31 looked like this . 
( Laughter ) So here ' s my question to you : What are you waiting for ? 
I guarantee you the next 30 days are going to pass whether you like it or not , so why not think about something you have always wanted to try and give it a shot ! 
For the next 30 days . 
We are losing our listening . 
We spend roughly 60 percent of our communication time listening , but we ' re not very good at it . 
We retain just 25 percent of what we hear . 
Now -- not you , not this talk , but that is generally true . 
( Laughter ) Let ' s define listening as making meaning from sound . 
It ' s a mental process , and it ' s a process of extraction . 
We use some pretty cool techniques to do this . 
One of them is pattern recognition . 
( Crowd noises ) So in a cocktail party like this , if I say , " David , Sara , pay attention " -- some of you just sat up . 
We recognize patterns to distinguish noise from signal , and especially our name . 
Differencing is another technique we use . 
If I left this pink noise on for more than a couple of minutes , ( Pink noise ) you would literally cease to hear it . 
We listen to differences ; we discount sounds that remain the same . 
And then there is a whole range of filters . 
These filters take us from all sound down to what we pay attention to . 
Most people are entirely unconscious of these filters . 
But they actually create our reality in a way , because they tell us what we ' re paying attention to right now . 
I ' ll give you one example of that . 
Intention is very important in sound , in listening . 
When I married my wife , I promised her I would listen to her every day as if for the first time . 
( Laughter ) But it ' s a great intention to have in a relationship . 
( Laughter ) But that ' s not all . 
If you close your eyes right now in this room , you ' re aware of the size of the room from the reverberation and the bouncing of the sound off the surfaces ; you ' re aware of how many people are around you , because of the micro-noises you ' re receiving . 
And sound places us in time as well , because sound always has time embedded in it . 
In fact , I would suggest that our listening is the main way that we experience the flow of time from past to future . 
So , " Sonority is time and meaning " -- a great quote . 
I said at the beginning , we ' re losing our listening . 
Why did I say that ? 
First of all , we invented ways of recording -- first writing , then audio recording and now video recording as well . 
The premium on accurate and careful listening has simply disappeared . 
Secondly , the world is now so noisy , ( Noise ) with this cacophony going on visually and auditorily , it ' s just hard to listen ; it ' s tiring to listen . 
Many people take refuge in headphones , but they turn big , public spaces like this , shared soundscapes , into millions of tiny , little personal sound bubbles . 
In this scenario , nobody ' s listening to anybody . 
We ' re becoming impatient . 
We don ' t want oratory anymore ; we want sound bites . 
And the art of conversation is being replaced -- dangerously , I think -- by personal broadcasting . 
I don ' t know how much listening there is in this conversation , which is sadly very common , especially in the UK . 
We ' re becoming desensitized . 
Our media have to scream at us with these kinds of headlines in order to get our attention . 
And that means it ' s harder for us to pay attention to the quiet , the subtle , the understated . 
This is a serious problem that we ' re losing our listening . 
This is not trivial , because listening is our access to understanding . 
Conscious listening always creates understanding , and only without conscious listening can these things happen . 
A world where we don ' t listen to each other at all is a very scary place indeed . 
So I ' d like to share with you five simple exercises , tools you can take away with you , to improve your own conscious listening . 
Audience : Yes ! 
Good. The first one is silence . 
Just three minutes a day of silence is a wonderful exercise to reset your ears and to recalibrate , so that you can hear the quiet again . 
If you can ' t get absolute silence , go for quiet , that ' s absolutely fine . 
Second , I call this " the mixer. " 
( Noise ) So even if you ' re in a noisy environment like this -- and we all spend a lot of time in places like this -- listen in the coffee bar to how many channels of sound can I hear ? 
How many individual channels in that mix am I listening to ? 
You can do it in a beautiful place as well , like in a lake . 
How many birds am I hearing ? 
Where are they ? Where are those ripples ? 
It ' s a great exercise for improving the quality of your listening . 
Third , this exercise I call " savoring , " and this is a beautiful exercise . 
It ' s about enjoying mundane sounds . 
This , for example , is my tumble dryer . 
( Dryer ) It ' s a waltz -- one , two , three ; one , two , three ; one , two , three . 
I love it ! 
Or just try this one on for size . 
( Coffee grinder ) Wow ! 
So , mundane sounds can be really interesting -- if you pay attention . 
I call that the " hidden choir " -- it ' s around us all the time . 
The next exercise is probably the most important of all of these , if you just take one thing away . 
This is listening positions -- the idea that you can move your listening position to what ' s appropriate to what you ' re listening to . 
This is playing with those filters . 
Remember I gave you those filters ? 
It ' s starting to play with them as levers , to get conscious about them and to move to different places . 
These are just some of the listening positions , or scales of listening positions , that you can use . 
There are many . 
Have fun with that. It ' s very exciting . 
And finally , an acronym . 
You can use this in listening , in communication . 
If you ' re in any one of those roles -- and I think that probably is everybody who ' s listening to this talk -- the acronym is RASA , which is the Sanskrit word for " juice " or " essence. " 
And RASA stands for " Receive , " which means pay attention to the person ; " Appreciate , " making little noises like " hmm , " " oh , " " OK " ; " Summarize " -- the word " so " is very important in communication ; and " Ask , " ask questions afterwards . 
Now sound is my passion , it ' s my life . 
I wrote a whole book about it. So I live to listen . 
That ' s too much to ask for most people . 
But I believe that every human being needs to listen consciously in order to live fully -- connected in space and in time to the physical world around us , connected in understanding to each other , not to mention spiritually connected , because every spiritual path I know of has listening and contemplation at its heart . 
That ' s why we need to teach listening in our schools as a skill . 
Why is it not taught ? It ' s crazy . 
And if we can teach listening in our schools , we can take our listening off that slippery slope to that dangerous , scary world that I talked about , and move it to a place where everybody is consciously listening all the time , or at least capable of doing it . 
Now , I don ' t know how to do that , but this is TED , and I think the TED community is capable of anything . 
So I invite you to connect with me , connect with each other , take this mission out . 
And let ' s get listening taught in schools , and transform the world in one generation to a conscious , listening world -- a world of connection , a world of understanding and a world of peace . 
Thank you for listening to me today . 
Each of you possesses the most powerful , dangerous and subversive trait that natural selection has ever devised . 
It ' s a piece of neural audio technology for rewiring other people ' s minds . 
I ' m talking about your language , of course , because it allows you to implant a thought from your mind directly into someone else ' s mind , and they can attempt to do the same to you , without either of you having to perform surgery . 
Instead , when you speak , you ' re actually using a form of telemetry not so different from the remote control device for your television . 
It ' s just that , whereas that device relies on pulses of infrared light , your language relies on pulses , discrete pulses , of sound . 
And just as you use the remote control device to alter the internal settings of your television to suit your mood , you use your language to alter the settings inside someone else ' s brain to suit your interests . 
Languages are genes talking , getting things that they want . 
And just imagine the sense of wonder in a baby when it first discovers that , merely by uttering a sound , it can get objects to move across a room as if by magic , and maybe even into its mouth . 
Now language ' s subversive power has been recognized throughout the ages in censorship , in books you can ' t read , phrases you can ' t use and words you can ' t say . 
In fact , the Tower of Babel story in the Bible is a fable and warning about the power of language . 
According to that story , early humans developed the conceit that , by using their language to work together , they could build a tower that would take them all the way to heaven . 
Now God , angered at this attempt to usurp his power , destroyed the tower , and then to ensure that it would never be rebuilt , he scattered the people by giving them different languages -- confused them by giving them different languages . 
And this leads to the wonderful irony that our languages exist to prevent us from communicating . 
Even today , we know that there are words we cannot use , phrases we cannot say , because if we do so , we might be accosted , jailed , or even killed . 
And all of this from a puff of air emanating from our mouths . 
Now all this fuss about a single one of our traits tells us there ' s something worth explaining . 
And that is how and why did this remarkable trait evolve , and why did it evolve only in our species ? 
Now it ' s a little bit of a surprise that to get an answer to that question , we have to go to tool use in the chimpanzees . 
Now these chimpanzees are using tools , and we take that as a sign of their intelligence . 
But if they really were intelligent , why would they use a stick to extract termites from the ground rather than a shovel ? 
And if they really were intelligent , why would they crack open nuts with a rock ? 
Why wouldn ' t they just go to a shop and buy a bag of nuts that somebody else had already cracked open for them ? 
Why not ? I mean , that ' s what we do . 
Now the reason the chimpanzees don ' t do that is that they lack what psychologists and anthropologists call social learning . 
They seem to lack the ability to learn from others by copying or imitating or simply watching . 
As a result , they can ' t improve on others ' ideas or learn from others ' mistakes -- benefit from others ' wisdom . 
And so they just do the same thing over and over and over again . 
In fact , we could go away for a million years and come back and these chimpanzees would be doing the same thing with the same sticks for the termites and the same rocks to crack open the nuts . 
Now this may sound arrogant , or even full of hubris . 
How do we know this ? 
Because this is exactly what our ancestors , the Homo erectus , did . 
These upright apes evolved on the African savanna about two million years ago , and they made these splendid hand axes that fit wonderfully into your hands . 
But if we look at the fossil record , we see that they made the same hand axe over and over and over again for one million years . 
You can follow it through the fossil record . 
Now if we make some guesses about how long Homo erectus lived , what their generation time was , that ' s about 40,000 generations of parents to offspring , and other individuals watching , in which that hand axe didn ' t change . 
It ' s not even clear that our very close genetic relatives , the Neanderthals , had social learning . 
Sure enough , their tools were more complicated than those of Homo erectus , but they too showed very little change over the 300,000 years or so that those species , the Neanderthals , lived in Eurasia . 
Okay , so what this tells us is that , contrary to the old adage , " monkey see , monkey do , " the surprise really is that all of the other animals really cannot do that -- at least not very much . 
And even this picture has the suspicious taint of being rigged about it -- something from a Barnum & amp ; amp ; Bailey circus . 
But by comparison , we can learn . 
We can learn by watching other people and copying or imitating what they can do . 
We can then choose , from among a range of options , the best one . 
We can benefit from others ' ideas . 
We can build on their wisdom . 
And as a result , our ideas do accumulate , and our technology progresses . 
And this cumulative cultural adaptation , as anthropologists call this accumulation of ideas , is responsible for everything around you in your bustling and teeming everyday lives . 
I mean the world has changed out of all proportion to what we would recognize even 1,000 or 2,000 years ago . 
And all of this because of cumulative cultural adaptation . 
The chairs you ' re sitting in , the lights in this auditorium , my microphone , the iPads and iPods that you carry around with you -- all are a result of cumulative cultural adaptation . 
Now to many commentators , cumulative cultural adaptation , or social learning , is job done , end of story . 
Our species can make stuff , therefore we prospered in a way that no other species has . 
In fact , we can even make the " stuff of life " -- as I just said , all the stuff around us . 
But in fact , it turns out that some time around 200,000 years ago , when our species first arose and acquired social learning , that this was really the beginning of our story , not the end of our story . 
Because our acquisition of social learning would create a social and evolutionary dilemma , the resolution of which , it ' s fair to say , would determine not only the future course of our psychology , but the future course of the entire world . 
And most importantly for this , it ' ll tell us why we have language . 
And the reason that dilemma arose is , it turns out , that social learning is visual theft . 
If I can learn by watching you , I can steal your best ideas , and I can benefit from your efforts , without having to put in the time and energy that you did into developing them . 
If I can watch which lure you use to catch a fish , or I can watch how you flake your hand axe to make it better , or if I follow you secretly to your mushroom patch , I can benefit from your knowledge and wisdom and skills , and maybe even catch that fish before you do . 
Social learning really is visual theft . 
And in any species that acquired it , it would behoove you to hide your best ideas , lest somebody steal them from you . 
And so some time around 200,000 years ago , our species confronted this crisis . 
And we really had only two options for dealing with the conflicts that visual theft would bring . 
One of those options was that we could have retreated into small family groups . 
Because then the benefits of our ideas and knowledge would flow just to our relatives . 
Had we chosen this option , sometime around 200,000 years ago , we would probably still be living like the Neanderthals were when we first entered Europe 40,000 years ago . 
And this is because in small groups there are fewer ideas , there are fewer innovations . 
And small groups are more prone to accidents and bad luck . 
So if we ' d chosen that path , our evolutionary path would have led into the forest -- and been a short one indeed . 
The other option we could choose was to develop the systems of communication that would allow us to share ideas and to cooperate amongst others . 
Choosing this option would mean that a vastly greater fund of accumulated knowledge and wisdom would become available to any one individual than would ever arise from within an individual family or an individual person on their own . 
Well , we chose the second option , and language is the result . 
Language evolved to solve the crisis of visual theft . 
Language is a piece of social technology for enhancing the benefits of cooperation -- for reaching agreements , for striking deals and for coordinating our activities . 
And you can see that , in a developing society that was beginning to acquire language , not having language would be a like a bird without wings . 
Just as wings open up this sphere of air for birds to exploit , language opened up the sphere of cooperation for humans to exploit . 
And we take this utterly for granted , because we ' re a species that is so at home with language , but you have to realize that even the simplest acts of exchange that we engage in are utterly dependent upon language . 
And to see why , consider two scenarios from early in our evolution . 
Let ' s imagine that you are really good at making arrowheads , but you ' re hopeless at making the wooden shafts with the flight feathers attached . 
Two other people you know are very good at making the wooden shafts , but they ' re hopeless at making the arrowheads . 
So what you do is -- one of those people has not really acquired language yet . 
And let ' s pretend the other one is good at language skills . 
So what you do one day is you take a pile of arrowheads , and you walk up to the one that can ' t speak very well , and you put the arrowheads down in front of him , hoping that he ' ll get the idea that you want to trade your arrowheads for finished arrows . 
But he looks at the pile of arrowheads , thinks they ' re a gift , picks them up , smiles and walks off . 
Now you pursue this guy , gesticulating . 
A scuffle ensues and you get stabbed with one of your own arrowheads . 
Okay , now replay this scene now , and you ' re approaching the one who has language . 
You put down your arrowheads and say , " I ' d like to trade these arrowheads for finished arrows. I ' ll split you 50/50. " 
The other one says , " Fine. Looks good to me . 
We ' ll do that. " 
Now the job is done . 
Once we have language , we can put our ideas together and cooperate to have a prosperity that we couldn ' t have before we acquired it . 
And this is why our species has prospered around the world while the rest of the animals sit behind bars in zoos , languishing . 
That ' s why we build space shuttles and cathedrals while the rest of the world sticks sticks into the ground to extract termites . 
All right , if this view of language and its value in solving the crisis of visual theft is true , any species that acquires it should show an explosion of creativity and prosperity . 
And this is exactly what the archeological record shows . 
If you look at our ancestors , the Neanderthals and the Homo erectus , our immediate ancestors , they ' re confined to small regions of the world . 
But when our species arose about 200,000 years ago , sometime after that we quickly walked out of Africa and spread around the entire world , occupying nearly every habitat on Earth . 
Now whereas other species are confined to places that their genes adapt them to , with social learning and language , we could transform the environment to suit our needs . 
And so we prospered in a way that no other animal has . 
Language really is the most potent trait that has ever evolved . 
It is the most valuable trait we have for converting new lands and resources into more people and their genes that natural selection has ever devised . 
Language really is the voice of our genes . 
Now having evolved language , though , we did something peculiar , even bizarre . 
As we spread out around the world , we developed thousands of different languages . 
Currently , there are about seven or 8,000 different languages spoken on Earth . 
Now you might say , well , this is just natural . 
As we diverge , our languages are naturally going to diverge . 
But the real puzzle and irony is that the greatest density of different languages on Earth is found where people are most tightly packed together . 
If we go to the island of Papua New Guinea , we can find about 800 to 1,000 distinct human languages , different human languages , spoken on that island alone . 
There are places on that island where you can encounter a new language every two or three miles . 
Now , incredible as this sounds , I once met a Papuan man , and I asked him if this could possibly be true . 
And he said to me , " Oh no . 
They ' re far closer together than that. " 
And it ' s true ; there are places on that island where you can encounter a new language in under a mile . 
And this is also true of some remote oceanic islands . 
And so it seems that we use our language , not just to cooperate , but to draw rings around our cooperative groups and to establish identities , and perhaps to protect our knowledge and wisdom and skills from eavesdropping from outside . 
And we know this because when we study different language groups and associate them with their cultures , we see that different languages slow the flow of ideas between groups . 
They slow the flow of technologies . 
And they even slow the flow of genes . 
Now I can ' t speak for you , but it seems to be the case that we don ' t have sex with people we can ' t talk to . 
( Laughter ) Now we have to counter that , though , against the evidence we ' ve heard that we might have had some rather distasteful genetic dalliances with the Neanderthals and the Denisovans . 
( Laughter ) Okay , this tendency we have , this seemingly natural tendency we have , towards isolation , towards keeping to ourselves , crashes head first into our modern world . 
This remarkable image is not a map of the world . 
In fact , it ' s a map of Facebook friendship links . 
And when you plot those friendship links by their latitude and longitude , it literally draws a map of the world . 
Our modern world is communicating with itself and with each other more than it has at any time in its past . 
And that communication , that connectivity around the world , that globalization now raises a burden . 
Because these different languages impose a barrier , as we ' ve just seen , to the transfer of goods and ideas and technologies and wisdom . 
And they impose a barrier to cooperation . 
And nowhere do we see that more clearly than in the European Union , whose 27 member countries speak 23 official languages . 
The European Union is now spending over one billion euros annually translating among their 23 official languages . 
That ' s something on the order of 1.45 billion U.S. dollars on translation costs alone . 
Now think of the absurdity of this situation . 
If 27 individuals from those 27 member states sat around table , speaking their 23 languages , some very simple mathematics will tell you that you need an army of 253 translators to anticipate all the pairwise possibilities . 
The European Union employs a permanent staff of about 2,500 translators . 
And in 2007 alone -- and I ' m sure there are more recent figures -- something on the order of 1.3 million pages were translated into English alone . 
And so if language really is the solution to the crisis of visual theft , if language really is the conduit of our cooperation , the technology that our species derived to promote the free flow and exchange of ideas , in our modern world , we confront a question . 
And that question is whether in this modern , globalized world we can really afford to have all these different languages . 
To put it this way , nature knows no other circumstance in which functionally equivalent traits coexist . 
One of them always drives the other extinct . 
And we see this in the inexorable march towards standardization . 
There are lots and lots of ways of measuring things -- weighing them and measuring their length -- but the metric system is winning . 
There are lots and lots of ways of measuring time , but a really bizarre base 60 system known as hours and minutes and seconds is nearly universal around the world . 
There are many , many ways of imprinting CDs or DVDs , but those are all being standardized as well . 
And you can probably think of many , many more in your own everyday lives . 
And so our modern world now is confronting us with a dilemma . 
And it ' s the dilemma that this Chinese man faces , who ' s language is spoken by more people in the world than any other single language , and yet he is sitting at his blackboard , converting Chinese phrases into English language phrases . 
And what this does is it raises the possibility to us that in a world in which we want to promote cooperation and exchange , and in a world that might be dependent more than ever before on cooperation to maintain and enhance our levels of prosperity , his actions suggest to us it might be inevitable that we have to confront the idea that our destiny is to be one world with one language . 
( Applause ) Matt Ridley : Mark , one question . 
Svante found that the FOXP2 gene , which seems to be associated with language , was also shared in the same form in Neanderthals as us . 
Do we have any idea how we could have defeated Neanderthals if they also had language ? 
Mark Pagel : This is a very good question . 
So many of you will be familiar with the idea that there ' s this gene called FOXP2 that seems to be implicated in some ways in the fine motor control that ' s associated with language . 
The reason why I don ' t believe that tells us that the Neanderthals had language is -- here ' s a simple analogy : Ferraris are cars that have engines . 
My car has an engine , but it ' s not a Ferrari . 
Now the simple answer then is that genes alone don ' t , all by themselves , determine the outcome of very complicated things like language . 
What we know about this FOXP2 and Neanderthals is that they may have had fine motor control of their mouths -- who knows . 
But that doesn ' t tell us they necessarily had language . 
MR : Thank you very much indeed . 
Humans in the developed world spend more than 90 percent of their lives indoors , where they breathe in and come into contact with trillions of life forms invisible to the naked eye : microorganisms . 
Buildings are complex ecosystems that are an important source of microbes that are good for us , and some that are bad for us . 
What determines the types and distributions of microbes indoors ? 
Buildings are colonized by airborne microbes that enter through windows and through mechanical ventilation systems . 
And they are brought inside by humans and other creatures . 
The fate of microbes indoors depends on complex interactions with humans , and with the human-built environment . 
And today , architects and biologists are working together to explore smart building design that will create healthy buildings for us . 
We spend an extraordinary amount of time in buildings that are extremely controlled environments , like this building here -- environments that have mechanical ventilation systems that include filtering , heating and air conditioning . 
Given the amount of time that we spend indoors , it ' s important to understand how this affects our health . 
At the Biology and the Built Environment Center , we carried out a study in a hospital where we sampled air and pulled the DNA out of microbes in the air . 
And we looked at three different types of rooms . 
We looked at rooms that were mechanically ventilated , which are the data points in the blue . 
We looked at rooms that were naturally ventilated , where the hospital let us turn off the mechanical ventilation in a wing of the building and pry open the windows that were no longer operable , but they made them operable for our study . 
And we also sampled the outdoor air . 
If you look at the x-axis of this graph , you ' ll see that what we commonly want to do -- which is keeping the outdoors out -- we accomplished that with mechanical ventilation . 
So if you look at the green data points , which is air that ' s outside , you ' ll see that there ' s a large amount of microbial diversity , or variety of microbial types . 
But if you look at the blue data points , which is mechanically ventilated air , it ' s not as diverse . 
But being less diverse is not necessarily good for our health . 
If you look at the y-axis of this graph , you ' ll see that , in the mechanically ventilated air , you have a higher probability of encountering a potential pathogen , or germ , than if you ' re outdoors . 
So to understand why this was the case , we took our data and put it into an ordination diagram , which is a statistical map that tells you something about how related the microbial communities are in the different samples . 
The data points that are closer together have microbial communities that are more similar than data points that are far apart . 
And the first things that you can see from this graph is , if you look at the blue data points , which are the mechanically ventilated air , they ' re not simply a subset of the green data points , which are the outdoor air . 
What we ' ve found is that mechanically ventilated air looks like humans . 
It has microbes on it that are commonly associated with our skin and with our mouth , our spit . 
And this is because we ' re all constantly shedding microbes . 
So all of you right now are sharing your microbes with one another . 
And when you ' re outdoors , that type of air has microbes that are commonly associated with plant leaves and with dirt . 
Why does this matter ? 
It matters because the health care industry is the second most energy intensive industry in the United States . 
Hospitals use two and a half times the amount of energy as office buildings . 
And the model that we ' re working with in hospitals , and also with many , many different buildings , is to keep the outdoors out . 
And this model may not necessarily be the best for our health . 
And given the extraordinary amount of nosocomial infections , or hospital-acquired infections , this is a clue that it ' s a good time to reconsider our current practices . 
So just as we manage national parks , where we promote the growth of some species and we inhibit the growth of others , we ' re working towards thinking about buildings using an ecosystem framework where we can promote the kinds of microbes that we want to have indoors . 
I ' ve heard somebody say that you ' re as healthy as your gut . 
And for this reason , many people eat probiotic yogurt so they can promote a healthy gut flora . 
And what we ultimately want to do is to be able to use this concept to promote a healthy group of microorganisms inside . 
( Applause ) 
I want to address the issue of compassion . 
Compassion has many faces . 
Some of them are fierce ; some of them are wrathful ; some of them are tender ; some of them are wise . 
A line that the Dalai Lama once said , he said , " Love and compassion are necessities . 
They are not luxuries . 
Without them , humanity cannot survive. " 
And I would suggest , it is not only humanity that won ' t survive , but it is all species on the planet , as we ' ve heard today . 
It is the big cats , and it ' s the plankton . 
Two weeks ago , I was in Bangalore in India . 
I was so privileged to be able to teach in a hospice on the outskirts of Bangalore . 
And early in the morning , I went into the ward . 
In that hospice , there were 31 men and women who were actively dying . 
And I walked up to the bedside of an old woman who was breathing very rapidly , fragile , obviously in the latter phase of active dying . 
I looked into her face . 
I looked into the face of her son sitting next to her , and his face was just riven with grief and confusion . 
And I remembered a line from the Mahabharata , the great Indian epic : " What is the most wondrous thing in the world , Yudhisthira ? " 
And Yudhisthira replied , " The most wondrous thing in the world is that all around us people can be dying and we don ' t realize it can happen to us. " 
I looked up . 
Tending those 31 dying people were young women from villages around Bangalore . 
I looked into the face of one of these women , and I saw in her face the strength that arises when natural compassion is really present . 
I watched her hands as she bathed an old man . 
My gaze went to another young woman as she wiped the face of another dying person . 
And it reminded me of something that I had just been present for . 
Every year or so , I have the privilege of taking clinicians into the Himalayas and the Tibetan Plateau . 
And we run clinics in these very remote regions where there ' s no medical care whatsoever . 
And on the first day at Simikot in Humla , far west of Nepal , the most impoverished region of Nepal , an old man came in clutching a bundle of rags . 
And he walked in , and somebody said something to him , we realized he was deaf , and we looked into the rags , and there was this pair of eyes . 
The rags were unwrapped from a little girl whose body was massively burned . 
Again , the eyes and hands of Avalokiteshvara . 
It was the young women , the health aids , who cleaned the wounds of this baby and dressed the wounds . 
I know those hands and eyes ; they touched me as well . 
They touched me at that time . 
They have touched me throughout my 68 years . 
They touched me when I was four and I lost my eyesight and was partially paralyzed . 
And my family brought in a woman whose mother had been a slave to take care of me . 
And that woman did not have sentimental compassion . 
She had phenomenal strength . 
And it was really her strength , I believe , that became the kind of mudra and imprimatur that has been a guiding light in my life . 
So we can ask : What is compassion comprised of ? 
And there are various facets . 
And there ' s referential and non-referential compassion . 
But first , compassion is comprised of that capacity to see clearly into the nature of suffering . 
It is that ability to really stand strong and to recognize also that I ' m not separate from this suffering . 
But that is not enough , because compassion , which activates the motor cortex , means that we aspire , we actually aspire to transform suffering . 
And if we ' re so blessed , we engage in activities that transform suffering . 
But compassion has another component , and that component is really essential . 
That component is that we cannot be attached to outcome . 
Now I worked with dying people for over 40 years . 
I had the privilege of working on death row in a maximum security [ prison ] for six years . 
And I realized so clearly in bringing my own life experience , from working with dying people and training caregivers , that any attachment to outcome would distort deeply my own capacity to be fully present to the whole catastrophe . 
And when I worked in the prison system , it was so clear to me , this : that many of us in this room , and almost all of the men that I worked with on death row , the seeds of their own compassion had never been watered . 
That compassion is actually an inherent human quality . 
It is there within every human being . 
But the conditions for compassion to be activated , to be aroused , are particular conditions . 
I had that condition , to a certain extent , from my own childhood illness . 
Eve Ensler , whom you ' ll hear later , has had that condition activated amazingly in her through the various waters of suffering that she has been through . 
And what is fascinating is that compassion has enemies , and those enemies are things like pity , moral outrage , fear . 
And you know , we have a society , a world , that is paralyzed by fear . 
And in that paralysis , of course , our capacity for compassion is also paralyzed . 
The very word terror is global . 
The very feeling of terror is global . 
So our work , in a certain way , is to address this imago , this kind of archetype that has pervaded the psyche of our entire globe . 
Now we know from neuroscience that compassion has some very extraordinary qualities . 
For example : A person who is cultivating compassion , when they are in the presence of suffering , they feel that suffering a lot more than many other people do . 
However , they return to baseline a lot sooner . 
This is called resilience . 
Many of us think that compassion drains us , but I promise you it is something that truly enlivens us . 
Another thing about compassion is that it really enhances what ' s called neural integration . 
It hooks up all parts of the brain . 
Another , which has been discovered by various researchers at Emory and at Davis and so on , is that compassion enhances our immune system . 
Hey , we live in a very noxious world . 
( Laughter ) Most of us are shrinking in the face of psycho-social and physical poisons , of the toxins of our world . 
But compassion , the generation of compassion , actually mobilizes our immunity . 
You know , if compassion is so good for us , I have a question . 
Why don ' t we train our children in compassion ? 
( Applause ) If compassion is so good for us , why don ' t we train our health care providers in compassion so that they can do what they ' re supposed to do , which is to really transform suffering ? 
And if compassion is so good for us , why don ' t we vote on compassion ? 
Why don ' t we vote for people in our government based on compassion , so that we can have a more caring world ? 
In Buddhism , we say , " it takes a strong back and a soft front. " 
It takes tremendous strength of the back to uphold yourself in the midst of conditions . 
And that is the mental quality of equanimity . 
But it also takes a soft front -- the capacity to really be open to the world as it is , to have an undefended heart . 
And the archetype of this in Buddhism is Avalokiteshvara , Kuan-Yin . 
It ' s a female archetype : she who perceives the cries of suffering in the world . 
She stands with 10,000 arms , and in every hand , there is an instrument of liberation , and in the palm of every hand , there are eyes , and these are the eyes of wisdom . 
I say that , for thousands of years , women have lived , exemplified , met in intimacy , the archetype of Avalokitesvara , of Kuan-Yin , she who perceives the cries of suffering in the world . 
Women have manifested for thousands of years the strength arising from compassion in an unfiltered , unmediated way in perceiving suffering as it is . 
They have infused societies with kindness , and we have really felt that as woman after woman has stood on this stage in the past day and a half . 
And they have actualized compassion through direct action . 
Jody Williams called it : It ' s good to meditate . 
I ' m sorry , you ' ve got to do a little bit of that , Jody . 
Step back , give your mother a break , okay . 
( Laughter ) But the other side of the equation is you ' ve got to come out of your cave . 
You have to come into the world like Asanga did , who was looking to realize Maitreya Buddha after 12 years sitting in the cave . 
He said , " I ' m out of here. " 
He ' s going down the path . 
He sees something in the path . 
He looks , it ' s a dog , he drops to his knees . 
He sees that the dog has this big wound on its leg . 
The wound is just filled with maggots . 
He puts out his tongue in order to remove the maggots , so as not to harm them . 
And at that moment , the dog transformed into the Buddha of love and kindness . 
I believe that women and girls today have to partner in a powerful way with men -- with their fathers , with their sons , with their brothers , with the plumbers , the road builders , the caregivers , the doctors , the lawyers , with our president , and with all beings . 
The women in this room are lotuses in a sea of fire . 
May we actualize that capacity for women everywhere . 
Now this is a very un-TED-like thing to do , but let ' s kick off the afternoon with a message from a mystery sponsor . 
Anonymous : Dear Fox News , it has come to our unfortunate attention that both the name and nature of Anonymous has been ravaged . 
We are everyone. We are no one . 
We are anonymous. We are legion . 
We do not forgive. We do not forget . 
We are but the base of chaos . 
Misha Glenny : Anonymous , ladies and gentlemen -- a sophisticated group of politically motivated hackers who have emerged in 2011 . 
And they ' re pretty scary . 
You never know when they ' re going to attack next , who or what the consequences will be . 
But interestingly , they have a sense of humor . 
These guys hacked into Fox News ' Twitter account to announce President Obama ' s assassination . 
Now you can imagine the panic that would have generated in the newsroom at Fox . 
" What do we do now ? 
Put on a black armband , or crack open the champagne ? " 
( Laughter ) And of course , who could escape the irony of a member of Rupert Murdoch ' s News Corp . 
being a victim of hacking for a change . 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) Sometimes you turn on the news and you say , " Is there anyone left to hack ? " 
Sony Playstation Network -- done , the government of Turkey -- tick , Britain ' s Serious Organized Crime Agency -- a breeze , the CIA -- falling off a log . 
In fact , a friend of mine from the security industry told me the other day that there are two types of companies in the world : those that know they ' ve been hacked , and those that don ' t . 
I mean three companies providing cybersecurity services to the FBI have been hacked . 
Is nothing sacred anymore , for heaven ' s sake ? 
Anyway , this mysterious group Anonymous -- and they would say this themselves -- they are providing a service by demonstrating how useless companies are at protecting our data . 
But there is also a very serious aspect to Anonymous -- they are ideologically driven . 
They claim that they are battling a dastardly conspiracy . 
They say that governments are trying to take over the Internet and control it , and that they , Anonymous , are the authentic voice of resistance -- be it against Middle Eastern dictatorships , against global media corporations , or against intelligence agencies , or whoever it is . 
And their politics are not entirely unattractive . 
Okay , they ' re a little inchoate . 
There ' s a strong whiff of half-baked anarchism about them . 
But one thing is true : we are at the beginning of a mighty struggle for control of the Internet . 
The Web links everything , and very soon it will mediate most human activity . 
Because the Internet has fashioned a new and complicated environment for an old-age dilemma that pits the demands of security with the desire for freedom . 
Now this is a very complicated struggle . 
And unfortunately , for mortals like you and me , we probably can ' t understand it very well . 
Nonetheless , in an unexpected attack of hubris a couple of years ago , I decided I would try and do that . 
And I sort of get it . 
These were the various things that I was looking at as I was trying to understand it . 
But in order to try and explain the whole thing , I would need another 18 minutes or so to do it , so you ' re just going to have to take it on trust from me on this occasion , and let me assure you that all of these issues are involved in cybersecurity and control of the Internet one way or the other , but in a configuration that even Stephen Hawking would probably have difficulty trying to get his head around . 
So there you are . 
And as you see , in the middle , there is our old friend , the hacker . 
The hacker is absolutely central to many of the political , social and economic issues affecting the Net . 
And so I thought to myself , " Well , these are the guys who I want to talk to. " 
And what do you know , nobody else does talk to the hackers . 
They ' re completely anonymous , as it were . 
So despite the fact that we are beginning to pour billions , hundreds of billions of dollars , into cybersecurity -- for the most extraordinary technical solutions -- no one wants to talk to these guys , the hackers , who are doing everything . 
Instead , we prefer these really dazzling technological solutions , which cost a huge amount of money . 
And so nothing is going into the hackers . 
Well , I say nothing , but actually there is one teeny weeny little research unit in Turin , Italy called the Hackers Profiling Project . 
And they are doing some fantastic research into the characteristics , into the abilities and the socialization of hackers . 
But because they ' re a U.N. operation , maybe that ' s why governments and corporations are not that interested in them . 
Because it ' s a U.N. operation , of course , it lacks funding . 
But I think they ' re doing very important work . 
Because where we have a surplus of technology in the cybersecurity industry , we have a definite lack of -- call me old-fashioned -- human intelligence . 
Now , so far I ' ve mentioned the hackers Anonymous who are a politically motivated hacking group . 
Of course , the criminal justice system treats them as common old garden criminals . 
But interestingly , Anonymous does not make use of its hacked information for financial gain . 
But what about the real cybercriminals ? 
Well real organized crime on the Internet goes back about 10 years when a group of gifted Ukrainian hackers developed a website , which led to the industrialization of cybercrime . 
Welcome to the now forgotten realm of CarderPlanet . 
This is how they were advertising themselves a decade ago on the Net . 
Now CarderPlanet was very interesting . 
Cybercriminals would go there to buy and sell stolen credit card details , to exchange information about new malware that was out there . 
And remember , this is a time when we ' re seeing for the first time so-called off-the-shelf malware . 
This is ready for use , out-of-the-box stuff , which you can deploy even if you ' re not a terribly sophisticated hacker . 
And so CarderPlanet became a sort of supermarket for cybercriminals . 
And its creators were incredibly smart and entrepreneurial , because they were faced with one enormous challenge as cybercriminals . 
And that challenge is : How do you do business , how do you trust somebody on the Web who you want to do business with when you know that they ' re a criminal ? 
( Laughter ) It ' s axiomatic that they ' re dodgy , and they ' re going to want to try and rip you off . 
So the family , as the inner core of CarderPlanet was known , came up with this brilliant idea called the escrow system . 
They appointed an officer who would mediate between the vendor and the purchaser . 
The vendor , say , had stolen credit card details ; the purchaser wanted to get a hold of them . 
The purchaser would send the administrative officer some dollars digitally , and the vendor would sell the stolen credit card details . 
And the officer would then verify if the stolen credit card worked . 
And if they did , he then passed on the money to the vendor and the stolen credit card details to the purchaser . 
And it was this which completely revolutionized cybercrime on the Web . 
And after that , it just went wild . 
We had a champagne decade for people who we know as Carders . 
Now I spoke to one of these Carders who we ' ll call RedBrigade -- although that wasn ' t even his proper nickname -- but I promised I wouldn ' t reveal who he was . 
And he explained to me how in 2003 and 2004 he would go on sprees in New York , taking out $ 10,000 from an ATM here , $ 30,000 from an ATM there , using cloned credit cards . 
He was making , on average a week , $ 150,000 -- tax free of course . 
And he said that he had so much money stashed in his upper-East side apartment at one point that he just didn ' t know what to do with it and actually fell into a depression . 
But that ' s a slightly different story , which I won ' t go into now . 
Now the interesting thing about RedBrigade is that he wasn ' t an advanced hacker . 
He sort of understood the technology , and he realized that security was very important if you were going to be a Carder , but he didn ' t spend his days and nights bent over a computer , eating pizza , drinking coke and that sort of thing . 
He was out there on the town having a fab time enjoying the high life . 
And this is because hackers are only one element in a cybercriminal enterprise . 
And often they ' re the most vulnerable element of all . 
And I want to explain this to you by introducing you to six characters who I met while I was doing this research . 
Dimitry Golubov , aka SCRIPT -- born in Odessa , Ukraine in 1982 . 
Now he developed his social and moral compass on the Black Sea port during the 1990s . 
This was a sink-or-swim environment where involvement in criminal or corrupt activities was entirely necessary if you wanted to survive . 
As an accomplished computer user , what Dimitry did was to transfer the gangster capitalism of his hometown onto the Worldwide Web . 
And he did a great job in it . 
You have to understand though that from his ninth birthday , the only environment he knew was gangsterism . 
He knew no other way of making a living and making money . 
Then we have Renukanth Subramaniam , aka JiLsi -- founder of DarkMarket , born in Colombo , Sri Lanka . 
As an eight year-old , he and his parents fled the Sri Lankan capital because Singhalese mobs were roaming the city , looking for Tamils like Renu to murder . 
At 11 , he was interrogated by the Sri Lankan military , accused of being a terrorist , and his parents sent him on his own to Britain as a refugee seeking political asylum . 
At 13 , with only little English and being bullied at school , he escaped into a world of computers where he showed great technical ability , but he was soon being seduced by people on the Internet . 
He was convicted of mortgage and credit card fraud , and he will be released from Wormwood Scrubs jail in London in 2012 . 
Matrix001 , who was an administrator at DarkMarket . 
Born in Southern Germany to a stable and well-respected middle class family , his obsession with gaming as a teenager led him to hacking . 
And he was soon controlling huge servers around the world where he stored his games that he had cracked and pirated . 
His slide into criminality was incremental . 
And when he finally woke up to his situation and understood the implications , he was already in too deep . 
Max Vision , aka ICEMAN -- mastermind of CardersMarket . 
Born in Meridian , Idaho . 
Max Vision was one of the best penetration testers working out of Santa Clara , California in the late 90s for private companies and voluntarily for the FBI . 
Now in the late 1990s , he discovered a vulnerability on all U.S. government networks , and he went in and patched it up -- because this included nuclear research facilities -- sparing the American government a huge security embarrassment . 
But also , because he was an inveterate hacker , he left a tiny digital wormhole through which he alone could crawl . 
But this was spotted by an eagle-eye investigator , and he was convicted . 
At his open prison , he came under the influence of financial fraudsters , and those financial fraudsters persuaded him to work for them on his release . 
And this man with a planetary-sized brain is now serving a 13-year sentence in California . 
Adewale Taiwo , aka FreddyBB -- master bank account cracker from Abuja in Nigeria . 
He set up his prosaically entitled newsgroup , bankfrauds@yahoo.co.uk before arriving in Britain in 2005 to take a Masters in chemical engineering at Manchester University . 
He impressed in the private sector , developing chemical applications for the oil industry while simultaneously running a worldwide bank and credit card fraud operation that was worth millions until his arrest in 2008 . 
And then finally , Cagatay Evyapan , aka Cha0 -- one of the most remarkable hackers ever , from Ankara in Turkey . 
He combined the tremendous skills of a geek with the suave social engineering skills of the master criminal . 
One of the smartest people I ' ve ever met . 
He also had the most effective virtual private network security arrangement the police have ever encountered amongst global cybercriminals . 
Now the important thing about all of these people is they share certain characteristics despite the fact that they come from very different environments . 
They are all people who learned their hacking skills in their early to mid-teens . 
They are all people who demonstrate advanced ability in maths and the sciences . 
Remember that , when they developed those hacking skills , their moral compass had not yet developed . 
And most of them , with the exception of SCRIPT and Cha0 , they did not demonstrate any real social skills in the outside world -- only on the Web . 
And the other thing is the high incidence of hackers like these who have characteristics which are consistent with Asperger ' s syndrome . 
Now I discussed this with Professor Simon Baron-Cohen who ' s the professor of developmental psychopathology at Cambridge . 
And he has done path-breaking work on autism and confirmed , also for the authorities here , that Gary McKinnon -- who is wanted by the United States for hacking into the Pentagon -- suffers from Asperger ' s and a secondary condition of depression . 
And Baron-Cohen explained that certain disabilities can manifest themselves in the hacking and computing world as tremendous skills , and that we should not be throwing in jail people who have such disabilities and skills because they have lost their way socially or been duped . 
Now I think we ' re missing a trick here , because I don ' t think people like Max Vision should be in jail . 
And let me be blunt about this . 
In China , in Russia and in loads of other countries that are developing cyber-offensive capabilities , this is exactly what they are doing . 
They are recruiting hackers both before and after they become involved in criminal and industrial espionage activities -- are mobilizing them on behalf of the state . 
We need to engage and find ways of offering guidance to these young people , because they are a remarkable breed . 
And if we rely , as we do at the moment , solely on the criminal justice system and the threat of punitive sentences , we will be nurturing a monster we cannot tame . 
Thank you very much for listening . 
( Applause ) Chris Anderson : So your idea worth spreading is hire hackers . 
How would someone get over that kind of fear that the hacker they hire might preserve that little teensy wormhole ? 
MG : I think to an extent , you have to understand that it ' s axiomatic among hackers that they do that . 
They ' re just relentless and obsessive about what they do . 
But all of the people who I ' ve spoken to who have fallen foul of the law , they have all said , " Please , please give us a chance to work in the legitimate industry . 
We just never knew how to get there , what we were doing . 
We want to work with you. " 
Chris Anderson : Okay , well that makes sense. Thanks a lot Misha . 
( Applause ) 
I want to say that really and truly , after these incredible speeches and ideas that are being spread , I am in the awkward position of being here to talk to you today about television . 
So most everyone watches TV . 
We like it. We like some parts of it . 
Here in America , people actually love TV . 
The average American watches TV for almost 5 hours a day . 
Okay ? 
Now I happen to make my living these days in television , so for me , that ' s a good thing . 
But a lot of people don ' t love it so much . 
They , in fact , berate it . 
They call it stupid , and worse , believe me . 
My mother , growing up , she called it the " idiot box. " 
But my idea today is not to debate whether there ' s such a thing as good TV or bad TV ; my idea today is to tell you that I believe television has a conscience . 
So why I believe that television has a conscience is that I actually believe that television directly reflects the moral , political , social and emotional need states of our nation -- that television is how we actually disseminate our entire value system . 
So all these things are uniquely human , and they all add up to our idea of conscience . 
Now today , we ' re not talking about good and bad TV . 
We ' re talking about popular TV . 
We ' re talking about top-10 Nielsen-rated shows over the course of 50 years . 
How do these Nielsen ratings reflect not just what you ' ve heard about , which is the idea of our social , collective unconscious , but how do these top-10 Nielsen-rated shows over 50 years reflect the idea of our social conscience ? 
How does television evolve over time , and what does this say about our society ? 
Now speaking of evolution , from basic biology , you probably remember that the animal kingdom , including humans , have four basic primal instincts . 
You have hunger ; you have sex ; you have power ; and you have the urge for acquisitiveness . 
As humans , what ' s important to remember is that we ' ve developed , we ' ve evolved over time to temper , or tame , these basic animal instincts . 
We have the capacity to laugh and cry . 
We feel awe , we feel pity . 
That is separate and apart from the animal kingdom . 
The other thing about human beings is that we love to be entertained . 
We love to watch TV . 
This is something that clearly separates us from the animal kingdom . 
Animals might love to play , but they don ' t love to watch . 
So I had an ambition to discover what could be understood from this uniquely human relationship between television programs and the human conscious . 
Why has television entertainment evolved the way it has ? 
I kind of think of it as this cartoon devil or angel sitting on our shoulders . 
Is television literally functioning as our conscience , tempting us and rewarding us at the same time ? 
So to begin to answer these questions , we did a research study . 
We went back 50 years to the 1959/1960 television season . 
We surveyed the top-20 Nielsen shows every year for 50 years -- a thousand shows . 
We talked to over 3,000 individuals -- almost 3,600 -- aged 18 to 70 , and we asked them how they felt emotionally . 
How did you feel watching every single one of these shows ? 
Did you feel a sense of moral ambiguity ? 
Did you feel outrage ? Did you laugh ? 
What did this mean for you ? 
So to our global TED audiences , I want to say that this was a U.S. sample . 
But as you can see , these emotional need states are truly universal . 
And on a factual basis , over 80 percent of the U.S. ' s most popular shows are exported around the world . 
So I really hope our global audiences can relate . 
Two acknowledgments before our first data slide : For inspiring me to even think about the idea of conscience and the tricks that conscience can play on us on a daily basis , I thank legendary rabbi , Jack Stern . 
And for the way in which I ' m going to present the data , I want to thank TED community superstar Hans Rosling , who you may have just seen . 
Okay , here we go . 
So here you see , from 1960 to 2010 , the 50 years of our study . 
Two things we ' re going to start with -- the inspiration state and the moral ambiguity state , which , for this purpose , we defined inspiration as television shows that uplift me , that make me feel much more positive about the world . 
Moral ambiguity are televisions shows in which I don ' t understand the difference between right and wrong . 
As we start , you see in 1960 inspiration is holding steady . 
That ' s what we ' re watching TV for . 
Moral ambiguity starts to climb . 
Right at the end of the 60s , moral ambiguity is going up , inspiration is kind of on the wane . 
The Cuban Missile Crisis , JFK is shot , the Civil Rights movement , race riots , the Vietnam War , MLK is shot , Bobby Kennedy is shot , Watergate . 
Look what happens . 
In 1970 , inspiration plummets . 
Moral ambiguity takes off . 
They cross , but Ronald Reagan , a telegenic president , is in office . 
It ' s trying to recover . 
But look , it can ' t : AIDS , Iran-Contra , the Challenger disaster , Chernobyl . 
Moral ambiguity becomes the dominant meme in television from 1990 for the next 20 years . 
Take a look at this . 
This chart is going to document a very similar trend . 
But in this case , we have comfort -- the bubble in red -- social commentary and irreverence in blue and green . 
Now this time on TV you have " Bonanza , " don ' t forget , you have " Gunsmoke , " you have " Andy Griffith , " you have domestic shows all about comfort . 
This is rising. Comfort stays whole . 
Irreverence starts to rise . 
Social commentary is all of a sudden spiking up . 
You get to 1969 , and look what happens . 
You have comfort , irreverence , and social commentary , not only battling it out in our society , but you literally have two establishment shows -- " Gunsmoke " and " Gomer Pyle " -- in 1969 are the number-two - and number-three-rated television shows . 
What ' s number one ? 
The socially irreverent hippie show , " Rowan and Martin ' s Laugh-In. " 
They ' re all living together , right . 
Viewers had responded dramatically . 
Look at this green spike in 1966 to a bellwether show . 
When you guys hear this industry term , a breakout hit , what does that mean ? 
It means in the 1966 television season , The " Smothers Brothers " came out of nowhere . 
This was the first show that allowed viewers to say , " My God , I can comment on how I feel about the Vietnam War , about the presidency , through television ? " 
That ' s what we mean by a breakout show . 
So then , just like the last chart , look what happens . 
In 1970 , the dam bursts. The dam bursts . 
Comfort is no longer why we watch television . 
Social commentary and irreverence rise throughout the 70s . 
Now look at this . 
The 70s means who ? Norman Lear . 
You have " All in the Family , " " Sanford and Son , " and the dominant show -- in the top-10 for the entire 70s -- " M & lt ; i & gt ; A & lt ; /i & gt ; S * H. " 
In the entire 50 years of television that we studied , seven of 10 shows ranked most highly for irreverence appeared on air during the Vietnam War , five of the top-10 during the Nixon administration . 
Only one generation , 20 years in , and we discovered , Wow ! TV can do that ? 
It can make me feel this ? 
It can change us ? 
So to this very , very savvy crowd , I also want to note the digital folks did not invent disruptive . 
Archie Bunker was shoved out of his easy chair along with the rest of us 40 years ago . 
This is a quick chart. Here ' s another attribute : fantasy and imagination , which are shows defined as , " takes me out of my everyday realm " and " makes me feel better. " 
That ' s mapped against the red dot , unemployment , which is a simple Bureau of Labor Department statistic . 
You ' ll see that every time fantasy and imagination shows rise , it maps to a spike in unemployment . 
Do we want to see shows about people saving money and being unemployed ? 
No. In the 70s you have the bellwether show " The Bionic Woman " that rocketed into the top-10 in 1973 , followed by the " Six Million-Dollar Man " and " Charlie ' s Angels. " 
Another spike in the 1980s -- another spike in shows about control and power . 
What were those shows ? 
Glamorous and rich . 
" Dallas , " " Fantasy Island. " 
Incredible mapping of our national psyche with some hard and fast facts : unemployment . 
So here you are , in my favorite chart , because this is our last 20 years . 
Whether or not you ' re in my business , you have surely heard or read of the decline of the thing called the three-camera sitcom and the rise of reality TV . 
Well , as we say in the business , X marks the spot . 
The 90s -- the big bubbles of humor -- we ' re watching " Friends , " " Frasier , " " Cheers " and " Seinfeld. " 
Everything ' s good , low unemployment . 
But look : X marks the spot . 
In 2001 , the September 2001 television season , humor succumbs to judgment once and for all . 
Why not ? 
We had a 2000 presidential election decided by the Supreme Court . 
We had the bursting of the tech bubble . 
We had 9/11 . 
Anthrax becomes part of the social lexicon . 
Look what happens when we keep going . 
At the turn of the century , the Internet takes off , reality television has taken hold . 
What do people want in their TV then ? 
I would have thought revenge or nostalgia . 
Give me some comfort ; my world is falling apart . 
No , they want judgment . 
I can vote you off the island . 
I can keep Sarah Palin ' s daughter dancing . 
I can choose the next American Idol. You ' re fired . 
That ' s all great , right ? 
So as dramatically different as these television shows , pure entertainment , have been over the last 50 years -- what did I start with ? -- one basic instinct remains . 
We ' re animals , we need our moms . 
There has not been a decade of television without a definitive , dominant TV mom . 
The 1950s : June Cleever in the original comfort show , " Leave it to Beaver. " 
Lucille Ball kept us laughing through the rise of social consciousness in the 60s . 
Maude Findlay , the epitome of the irreverent 1970s , who tackled abortion , divorce , even menopause on TV . 
The 1980s , our first cougar was given to us in the form of Alexis Carrington . 
Murphy Brown took on a vice president when she took on the idea of single parenthood . 
This era ' s mom , Bree Van de Kamp . 
Now I don ' t know if this is the devil or the angel sitting on our conscience , sitting on television ' s shoulders , but I do know that I absolutely love this image . 
So to you all , the women of TEDWomen , the men of TEDWomen , the global audiences of TEDWomen , thank you for letting me present my idea about the conscience of television . 
But let me also thank the incredible creators who get up everyday to put their ideas on our television screens throughout all these ages of television . 
They give it life on television , for sure , but it ' s you as viewers , through your collective social consciences , that give it life , longevity , power or not . 
So thanks very much . 
So I ' m a doctor , but I kind of slipped sideways into research , and now I ' m an epidemiologist . 
And nobody really knows what epidemiology is . 
Epidemiology is the science of how we know in the real world if something is good for you or bad for you . 
And it ' s best understood through example as the science of those crazy , wacky newspaper headlines . 
And these are just some of the examples . 
These are from the Daily Mail . 
Every country in the world has a newspaper like this . 
It has this bizarre , ongoing philosophical project of dividing all the inanimate objects in the world into the ones that either cause or prevent cancer . 
Here are some of the things they said cause cancer : divorce , Wi-Fi , toiletries and coffee . 
Some things they say prevent cancer : crusts , red pepper , licorice and coffee . 
So you can see there are contradictions . 
Coffee both causes and prevents cancer . 
As you start to read on , you can see that maybe there ' s some political valence behind some of this . 
For women , housework prevents breast cancer , but for men , shopping could make you impotent . 
( Laughter ) So we know that we need to start unpicking the science behind this . 
And what I hope to show is that unpicking the evidence behind dodgy claims isn ' t a kind of nasty , carping activity ; it ' s socially useful . 
But it ' s also an extremely valuable explanatory tool , because real science is about critically appraising the evidence for somebody else ' s position . 
That ' s what happens in academic journals , it ' s what happens at academic conferences -- the Q & amp ; amp ; A session after a postdoc presents data is often a bloodbath . 
And nobody minds that ; we actively welcome it . 
It ' s like a consenting intellectual S & amp ; amp ; M activity . 
( Laughter ) So what I ' m going to show you is all of the main things , all of the main features of my discipline , evidence-based medicine . 
And I will talk you through all of these and demonstrate how they work , exclusively using examples of people getting stuff wrong . 
We ' ll start with the absolute weakest form of evidence known to man , and that is authority . 
In science , we don ' t care how many letters you have after your name -- we want to know what your reasons are for believing something . 
How do you know that something is good for us or bad for us ? 
But we ' re also unimpressed by authority because it ' s so easy to contrive . 
This is somebody called Dr. Gillian McKeith , PhD , or , to give her full medical title , Gillian McKeith . 
( Laughter ) Again , every country has somebody like this . 
She is our TV diet guru . 
She has five series of prime-time television , giving out very lavish and exotic health advice . 
She , it turns out , has a non-accredited correspondence course PhD from somewhere in America . 
She also boasts that she ' s a certified professional member of the American Association of Nutritional Consultants , which sounds very glamorous ; you get a certificate . 
This one belongs to my dead cat , Hettie. She was a horrible cat . 
You go to the website , fill out the form , give them $ 60 , it arrives in the post . 
She also says things like eat lots of dark green leaves , they contain chlorophyll and really oxygenate your blood . 
And anybody who ' s done school biology remembers that chlorophyll and chloroplasts only make oxygen in sunlight , and it ' s quite dark in your bowels after you ' ve eaten spinach . 
Next , we need proper science , proper evidence . 
So : " Red wine can help prevent breast cancer. " 
This is a headline from The Daily Telegraph in the UK . 
" A glass of red wine a day could help prevent breast cancer. " 
So you find this paper , and find that it is a real piece of science . 
It ' s a description of the changes in the behavior of one enzyme when you drip a chemical extracted from some red grape skin onto some cancer cells in a dish on a bench in a laboratory somewhere . 
And that ' s a really useful thing to describe in a scientific paper . 
But on the question of your own personal risk of getting breast cancer if you drink red wine , it tells you absolutely bugger all . 
Actually , it turns out that your risk of breast cancer increases slightly with every amount of alcohol you drink . 
So what we want are studies in real human people . 
And here ' s another example . 
This is from Britain ' s " leading " diet nutritionist in the Daily Mirror , our second-biggest selling newspaper . 
" An Australian study in 2001 found that olive oil , in combination with fruits , vegetables and pulses , offers measurable protection against skin wrinklings , " and give the advice : " If you eat olive oil and vegetables , you ' ll have fewer wrinkles. " 
They helpfully tell you how to find the paper , and what you find is an observational study . 
Obviously , nobody has been able to go back to 1930 , get all the people born in one maternity unit , and half of them eat lots of fruit and veg and olive oil , half of them eat McDonald ' s , and then we see how many wrinkles you ' ve got later . 
You have to take a snapshot of how people are now . 
And what you find is , of course : people who eat veg and olive oil have fewer wrinkles . 
But that ' s because people who eat fruit and veg and olive oil are freaks -- they ' re not normal , they ' re like you ; they come to events like this . 
( Laughter ) They ' re posh , they ' re wealthy , less likely to have outdoor jobs , less likely to do manual labor , they have better social support , are less likely to smoke ; for a host of fascinating , interlocking social , political and cultural reasons , they ' re less likely to have wrinkles . 
That doesn ' t mean it ' s the vegetables or olive oil . 
( Laughter ) So ideally , what you want to do is a trial . 
People think they ' re familiar with the idea of a trial . 
Trials are old ; the first one was in the Bible , Daniel 1:12 . 
It ' s straightforward : take a bunch of people , split them in half , treat one group one way , the other group , the other way . 
A while later , you see what happened to each of them . 
I ' m going to tell you about one trial , which is probably the most well-reported trial in the UK news media over the past decade . 
This is the trial of fish oil pills . 
The claim : fish oil pills improve school performance and behavior in mainstream children . 
They said , " We did a trial . 
All the previous ones were positive , this one will be too. " 
That should ring alarm bells : if you know the answer to your trial , you shouldn ' t be doing one . 
Either you ' ve rigged it by design , or you ' ve got enough data so there ' s no need to randomize people anymore . 
So this is what they were going to do in their trial : They were taking 3,000 children , they were going to give them these huge fish oil pills , six of them a day , and then , a year later , measure their school exam performance and compare their performance against what they predicted their exam performance would have been if they hadn ' t had the pills . 
Now , can anybody spot a flaw in this design ? 
( Laughter ) And no professors of clinical trial methodology are allowed to answer this question . 
So there ' s no control group . 
But that sounds really techie , right ? That ' s a technical term . 
The kids got the pills , and their performance improved . 
What else could it possibly be if it wasn ' t the pills ? 
They got older ; we all develop over time . 
And of course , there ' s the placebo effect , one of the most fascinating things in the whole of medicine . 
It ' s not just taking a pill and performance or pain improving ; it ' s about our beliefs and expectations , the cultural meaning of a treatment . 
And this has been demonstrated in a whole raft of fascinating studies comparing one kind of placebo against another . 
So we know , for example , that two sugar pills a day are a more effective treatment for gastric ulcers than one sugar pill . 
That ' s an outrageous and ridiculous finding , but it ' s true . 
We know from three different studies on three different types of pain that a saltwater injection is a more effective treatment than a sugar pill , a dummy pill with no medicine in it , not because the injection or pills do anything physically to the body , but because an injection feels like a much more dramatic intervention . 
So we know that our beliefs and expectations can be manipulated , which is why we do trials where we control against a placebo , where one half of the people get the real treatment , and the other half get placebo . 
But that ' s not enough . 
What I ' ve just shown you are examples of the very simple and straightforward ways that journalists and food supplement pill peddlers and naturopaths can distort evidence for their own purposes . 
What I find really fascinating is that the pharmaceutical industry uses exactly the same kinds of tricks and devices , but slightly more sophisticated versions of them , in order to distort the evidence they give to doctors and patients , and which we use to make vitally important decisions . 
So firstly , trials against placebo : everybody thinks a trial should be a comparison of your new drug against placebo . 
But in a lot of situations that ' s wrong ; often , we already have a good treatment currently available . 
So we don ' t want to know that your alternative new treatment is better than nothing , but that it ' s better than the best available treatment we have . 
And yet , repeatedly , you consistently see people doing trials still against placebo . 
And you can get licensed to bring your drug to market with only data showing that it ' s better than nothing , which is useless for a doctor like me trying to make a decision . 
But that ' s not the only way you can rig your data . 
You can also rig your data by making the thing you compare your new drug against really rubbish . 
You can give the competing drug in too low a dose , so people aren ' t properly treated . 
You can give the competing drug in too high a dose , so people get side effects . 
And this is exactly what happened with antipsychotic medication for schizophrenia . 
Twenty years ago , a new generation of antipsychotic drugs were brought in ; the promise was they would have fewer side effects . 
So people set about doing trials of the new drugs against the old drugs . 
But they gave the old drugs in ridiculously high doses : 20 milligrams a day of haloperidol . 
And it ' s a foregone conclusion if you give a drug at that high a dose , it will have more side effects , and your new drug will look better . 
Ten years ago , history repeated itself , when risperidone , the first of the new-generation antipsychotic drugs , came off copyright , so anybody could make copies . 
Everybody wanted to show their drug was better than risperidone , so you see trials comparing new antipsychotic drugs against risperidone at eight milligrams a day . 
Again , not an insane dose , not an illegal dose , but very much at the high end of normal . 
So you ' re bound to make your new drug look better . 
And so it ' s no surprise that overall , industry-funded trials are four times more likely to give a positive result than independently sponsored trials . 
But -- and it ' s a big but -- ( Laughter ) it turns out , when you look at the methods used by industry-funded trials , that they ' re actually better than independently sponsored trials . 
And yet , they always manage to get the result that they want . 
So how does this work ? 
( Laughter ) How can we explain this strange phenomenon ? 
Well , it turns out that what happens is the negative data goes missing in action ; it ' s withheld from doctors and patients . 
And this is the most important aspect of the whole story . 
It ' s at the top of the pyramid of evidence . 
We need to have all of the data on a particular treatment to know whether or not it really is effective . 
There are two different ways you can spot whether some data has gone missing . 
You can use statistics or you can use stories . 
I prefer statistics , so that ' s what I ' ll do first . 
This is a funnel plot . 
A funnel plot is a very clever way of spotting if small negative trials have disappeared , have gone missing in action . 
This is a graph of all of the trials done on a particular treatment . 
As you go up towards the top of the graph , what you see is each dot is a trial . 
As you go up , those are bigger trials , so they ' ve got less error ; they ' re less likely to be randomly false positives or negatives . 
So they all cluster together . 
The big trials are closer to the true answer . 
Then as you go further down at the bottom , what you can see is , on this side , spurious false negatives , and over on this side , spurious false positives . 
If there is publication bias , if small negative trials have gone missing in action , you can see it on one of these graphs . 
So you see here that the small negative trials that should be on the bottom left have disappeared . 
This is a graph demonstrating the presence of publication bias in studies of publication bias . 
And I think that ' s the funniest epidemiology joke you will ever hear . 
( Laughter ) That ' s how you can prove it statistically . 
But what about stories ? 
Well , they ' re heinous , they really are . 
This is a drug called reboxetine . 
This is a drug which I , myself , have prescribed to patients . 
And I ' m a very nerdy doctor . 
I hope I go out of my way to try and read and understand all the literature . 
I read the trials on this . 
They were all positive , all well-conducted . 
I found no flaw . 
Unfortunately , it turned out , that many of these trials were withheld . 
In fact , 76 percent of all of the trials that were done on this drug were withheld from doctors and patients . 
Now if you think about it , if I tossed a coin a hundred times , and I ' m allowed to withhold from you the answers half the times , then I can convince you that I have a coin with two heads . 
If we remove half of the data , we can never know what the true effect size of these medicines is . 
And this is not an isolated story . 
Around half of all of the trial data on antidepressants has been withheld , but it goes way beyond that . 
The Nordic Cochrane Group were trying to get ahold of the data on that to bring it all together . 
The Cochrane Groups are an international nonprofit collaboration that produce systematic reviews of all of the data that has ever been shown . 
But the companies withheld that data from them . 
So did the European Medicines Agency -- for three years . 
This is a problem that is currently lacking a solution . 
And to show how big it goes , this is a drug called Tamiflu , which governments around the world have spent billions and billions of dollars on . 
And they spend that money on the promise that this is a drug which will reduce the rate of complications with flu . 
We already have the data showing it reduces the duration of your flu by a few hours . 
But I don ' t care about that , governments don ' t care . 
I ' m sorry if you have the flu , I know it ' s horrible , but we ' re not going to spend billions of dollars trying to reduce the duration of your flu symptoms by half a day . 
We prescribe these drugs . 
We stockpile them for emergencies on the understanding they ' ll reduce the number of complications , which means pneumonia and death . 
The infectious diseases Cochrane Group , which are based in Italy , has been trying to get the full data in a usable form out of the drug companies , so they can make a full decision about whether this drug is effective or not , and they ' ve not been able to get that information . 
This is undoubtedly the single biggest ethical problem facing medicine today . 
We cannot make decisions in the absence of all of the information . 
So it ' s a little bit difficult from there to spin in some kind of positive conclusion . 
But I would say this : I think that sunlight is the best disinfectant . 
All of these things are happening in plain sight , and they ' re all protected by a force field of tediousness . 
And I think , with all of the problems in science , one of the best things that we can do is to lift up the lid , finger around at the mechanics and peer in . 
What ' s in the box ? 
Whatever it is must be pretty important , because I ' ve traveled with it , moved it , from apartment to apartment to apartment . 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) Sound familiar ? 
Did you know that we Americans have about three times the amount of space we did 50 years ago ? 
Three times . 
So you ' d think , with all this extra space , we ' d have plenty of room for all our stuff . 
Nope . 
There ' s a new industry in town , a 22 billion-dollar , 2.2 billion sq. ft. industry : that of personal storage . 
So we ' ve got triple the space , but we ' ve become such good shoppers that we need even more space . 
So where does this lead ? 
Lots of credit card debt , huge environmental footprints , and perhaps not coincidentally , our happiness levels flat-lined over the same 50 years . 
Well I ' m here to suggest there ' s a better way , that less might actually equal more . 
I bet most of us have experienced at some point the joys of less : college -- in your dorm , traveling -- in a hotel room , camping -- rig up basically nothing , maybe a boat . 
Whatever it was for you , I bet that , among other things , this gave you a little more freedom , a little more time . 
So I ' m going to suggest that less stuff and less space are going to equal a smaller footprint . 
It ' s actually a great way to save you some money . 
And it ' s going to give you a little more ease in your life . 
So I started a project called Life Edited at lifeedited.org to further this conversation and to find some great solutions in this area . 
First up : crowd-sourcing my 420 sq. ft. apartment in Manhattan with partners Mutopo and Jovoto.com . 
I wanted it all -- home office , sit down dinner for 10 , room for guests , and all my kite surfing gear . 
With over 300 entries from around the world , I got it , my own little jewel box . 
By buying a space that was 420 sq. ft . 
instead of 600 , immediately I ' m saving 200 grand . 
Smaller space is going to make for smaller utilities -- save some more money there , but also a smaller footprint . 
And because it ' s really designed around an edited set of possessions -- my favorite stuff -- and really designed for me , I ' m really excited to be there . 
So how can you live little ? 
Three main approaches . 
First of all , you have to edit ruthlessly . 
We ' ve got to clear the arteries of our lives . 
And that shirt that I hadn ' t worn in years ? 
It ' s time for me to let it go . 
We ' ve got to cut the extraneous out of our lives , and we ' ve got to learn to stem the inflow . 
We need to think before we buy . 
Ask ourselves , " Is that really going to make me happier ? Truly ? " 
By all means , we should buy and own some great stuff . 
But we want stuff that we ' re going to love for years , not just stuff . 
Secondly , our new mantra : small is sexy . 
We want space efficiency . 
We want things that are designed for how they ' re used the vast majority of the time , not that rare event . 
Why have a six burner stove when you rarely use three ? 
So we want things that nest , we want things that stack , and we want it digitized . 
You can take paperwork , books , movies , and you can make it disappear -- it ' s magic . 
Finally , we want multifunctional spaces and housewares -- a sink combined with a toilet , a dining table becomes a bed -- same space , a little side table stretches out to seat 10 . 
In the winning Life Edited scheme in a render here , we combine a moving wall with transformer furniture to get a lot out of the space . 
Look at the coffee table -- it grows in height and width to seat 10 . 
My office folds away , easily hidden . 
My bed just pops out of the wall with two fingers . 
Guests ? Move the moving wall , have some fold-down guest beds . 
And of course , my own movie theater . 
So I ' m not saying that we all need to live in 420 sq. ft . 
But consider the benefits of an edited life . 
Go from 3,000 to 2,000 , from 1,500 to 1,000 . 
Most of us , maybe all of us , are here pretty happily for a bunch of days with a couple of bags , maybe a small space , a hotel room . 
So when you go home and you walk through your front door , take a second and ask yourselves , " Could I do with a little life editing ? 
Would that give me a little more freedom ? 
Maybe a little more time ? " 
It doesn ' t really matter . 
I know I don ' t need it . 
What ' s in yours ? 
Maybe , just maybe , less might equal more . 
So let ' s make room for the good stuff . 
I ' m a garbage man . 
And you might find it interesting that I became a garbage man , because I absolutely hate waste . 
I hope , within the next 10 minutes , to change the way you think about a lot of the stuff in your life . 
And I ' d like to start at the very beginning . 
Think back when you were just a kid . 
How did look at the stuff in your life ? 
Perhaps it was like these toddler rules : It ' s my stuff if I saw it first . 
The entire pile is my stuff if I ' m building something . 
The more stuff that ' s mine , the better . 
And of course , it ' s your stuff if it ' s broken . 
( Laughter ) Well after spending about 20 years in the recycling industry , it ' s become pretty clear to me that we don ' t necessarily leave these toddler rules behind as we develop into adults . 
And let me tell you why I have that perspective . 
Because each and every day at our recycling plants around the world we handle about one million pounds of people ' s discarded stuff . 
Now a million pounds a day sounds like a lot of stuff , but it ' s a tiny drop of the durable goods that are disposed each and every year around the world -- well less than one percent . 
In fact , the United Nations estimates that there ' s about 85 billion pounds a year of electronics waste that gets discarded around the world each and every year -- and that ' s one of the most rapidly growing parts of our waste stream . 
And if you throw in other durable goods like automobiles and so forth , that number well more than doubles . 
And of course , the more developed the country , the bigger these mountains . 
Now when you see these mountains , most people think of garbage . 
We see above-ground mines . 
And the reason we see mines is because there ' s a lot of valuable raw materials that went into making all of this stuff in the first place . 
And it ' s becoming increasingly important that we figure out how to extract these raw materials from these extremely complicated waste streams . 
Because as we ' ve heard all week at TED , the world ' s getting to be a smaller place with more people in it who want more and more stuff . 
And of course , they want the toys and the tools that many of us take for granted . 
And what goes into making those toys and tools that we use every single day ? 
It ' s mostly many types of plastics and many types of metals . 
And the metals , we typically get from ore that we mine in ever widening mines and ever deepening mines around the world . 
And the plastics , we get from oil , which we go to more remote locations and drill ever deeper wells to extract . 
And these practices have significant economic and environmental implications that we ' re already starting to see today . 
The good news is we are starting to recover materials from our end-of-life stuff and starting to recycle our end-of-life stuff , particularly in regions of the world like here in Europe that have recycling policies in place that require that this stuff be recycled in a responsible manner . 
Most of what ' s extracted from our end-of-life stuff , if it makes it to a recycler , are the metals . 
To put that in perspective -- and I ' m using steel as a proxy here for metals , because it ' s the most common metal -- if your stuff makes it to a recycler , probably over 90 percent of the metals are going to be recovered and reused for another purpose . 
Plastics are a whole other story : well less than 10 percent are recovered . 
In fact , it ' s more like five percent . 
Most of it ' s incinerated or landfilled . 
Now most people think that ' s because plastics are a throw-away material , have very little value . 
But actually , plastics are several times more valuable than steel . 
And there ' s more plastics produced and consumed around the world on a volume basis every year than steel . 
So why is such a plentiful and valuable material not recovered at anywhere near the rate of the less valuable material ? 
Well it ' s predominantly because metals are very easy to recycle from other materials and from one another . 
They have very different densities . 
They have different electrical and magnetic properties . 
And they even have different colors . 
So it ' s very easy for either humans or machines to separate these metals from one another and from other materials . 
Plastics have overlapping densities over a very narrow range . 
They have either identical or very similar electrical and magnetic properties . 
And any plastic can be any color , as you probably well know . 
So the traditional ways of separating materials just simply don ' t work for plastics . 
Another consequence of metals being so easy to recycle by humans is that a lot of our stuff from the developed world -- and sadly to say , particularly from the United States , where we don ' t have any recycling policies in place like here in Europe -- finds its way to developing countries for low-cost recycling . 
People , for as little as a dollar a day , pick through our stuff . 
They extract what they can , which is mostly the metals -- circuit boards and so forth -- and they leave behind mostly what they can ' t recover , which is , again , mostly the plastics . 
Or they burn the plastics to get to the metals in burn houses like you see here . 
And they extract the metals by hand . 
Now while this may be the low-economic-cost solution , this is certainly not the low-environmental or human health-and-safety solution . 
I call this environmental arbitrage . 
And it ' s not fair , it ' s not safe and it ' s not sustainable . 
Now because the plastics are so plentiful -- and by the way , those other methods don ' t lead to the recovery of plastics , obviously -- but people do try to recover the plastics . 
This is just one example . 
This is a photo I took standing on the rooftops of one of the largest slums in the world in Mumbai , India . 
They store the plastics on the roofs . 
They bring them below those roofs into small workshops like these , and people try very hard to separate the plastics , by color , by shape , by feel , by any technique they can . 
And sometimes they ' ll resort to what ' s known as the " burn and sniff " technique where they ' ll burn the plastic and smell the fumes to try to determine the type of plastic . 
None of these techniques result in any amount of recycling in any significant way . 
And by the way , please don ' t try this technique at home . 
So what are we to do about this space-age material , at least what we used to call a space-aged material , these plastics ? 
Well I certainly believe that it ' s far too valuable and far too abundant to keep putting back in the ground or certainly send up in smoke . 
So about 20 years ago , I literally started in my garage tinkering around , trying to figure out how to separate these very similar materials from each other , and eventually enlisted a lot of my friends , in the mining world actually , and in the plastics world , and we started going around to mining laboratories around the world . 
Because after all , we ' re doing above-ground mining . 
And we eventually broke the code . 
This is the last frontier of recycling . 
It ' s the last major material to be recovered in any significant amount on the Earth . 
And we finally figured out how to do it . 
And in the process , we started recreating how the plastics industry makes plastics . 
The traditional way to make plastics is with oil or petrochemicals . 
You breakdown the molecules , you recombine them in very specific ways , to make all the wonderful plastics that we enjoy each and every day . 
We said , there ' s got to be a more sustainable way to make plastics . 
And not just sustainable from an environmental standpoint , sustainable from an economic standpoint as well . 
Well a good place to start is with waste . 
It certainly doesn ' t cost as much as oil , and it ' s plentiful , as I hope that you ' ve been able to see from the photographs . 
And because we ' re not breaking down the plastic into molecules and recombining them , we ' re using a mining approach to extract the materials . 
We have significantly lower capital costs in our plant equipment . 
We have enormous energy savings . 
I don ' t know how many other projects on the planet right now can save 80 to 90 percent of the energy compared to making something the traditional way . 
And instead of plopping down several hundred million dollars to build a chemical plant that will only make one type of plastic for its entire life , our plants can make any type of plastic we feed them . 
And we make a drop-in replacement for that plastic that ' s made from petrochemicals . 
Our customers get to enjoy huge CO2 savings . 
They get to close the loop with their products . 
And they get to make more sustainable products . 
In the short time period I have , I want to show you a little bit of a sense about how we do this . 
It starts with metal recyclers who shred our stuff into very small bits . 
They recover the metals and leave behind what ' s called shredder residue -- it ' s their waste -- a very complex mixture of materials , but predominantly plastics . 
We take out the things that aren ' t plastics , such as the metals they missed , carpeting , foam , rubber , wood , glass , paper , you name it . 
Even an occasional dead animal , unfortunately . 
And it goes in the first part of our process here , which is more like traditional recycling . 
We ' re sieving the material , we ' re using magnets , we ' re using air classification . 
It looks like the Willy Wonka factory at this point . 
At the end of this process , we have a mixed plastic composite : many different types of plastics and many different grades of plastics . 
This goes into the more sophisticated part of our process , and the really hard work , multi-step separation process begins . 
We grind the plastic down to about the size of your small fingernail . 
We use a very highly automated process to sort those plastics , not only by type , but by grade . 
And out the end of that part of the process come little flakes of plastic : one type , one grade . 
We then use optical sorting to color sort this material . 
We blend it in 50,000 - lb. blending silos . 
We push that material to extruders where we melt it , push it through small die holes , make spaghetti-like plastic strands . 
And we chop those strands into what are called pellets . 
And this becomes the currency of the plastics industry . 
This is the same material that you would get from oil . 
And today , we ' re producing it from your old stuff , and it ' s going right back into your new stuff . 
( Applause ) So now , instead of your stuff ending up on a hillside in a developing country or literally going up in smoke , you can find your old stuff back on top of your desk in new products , in your office , or back at work in your home . 
And these are just a few examples of companies that are buying our plastic , replacing virgin plastic , to make their new products . 
So I hope I ' ve changed the way you look at at least some of the stuff in your life . 
We took our clues from mother nature . 
Mother nature wastes very little , reuses practically everything . 
And I hope that you stop looking at yourself as a consumer -- that ' s a label I ' ve always hated my entire life -- and think of yourself as just using resources in one form , until they can be transformed to another form for another use later in time . 
And finally , I hope you agree with me to change that last toddler rule just a little bit to : " If it ' s broken , it ' s my stuff. " 
Thank you for your time . 
What is going on in this baby ' s mind ? 
If you ' d asked people this 30 years ago , most people , including psychologists , would have said that this baby was irrational , illogical , egocentric -- that he couldn ' t take the perspective of another person or understand cause and effect . 
In the last 20 years , developmental science has completely overturned that picture . 
So in some ways , we think that this baby ' s thinking is like the thinking of the most brilliant scientists . 
Let me give you just one example of this . 
One thing that this baby could be thinking about , that could be going on in his mind , is trying to figure out what ' s going on in the mind of that other baby . 
After all , one of the things that ' s hardest for all of us to do is to figure out what other people are thinking and feeling . 
And maybe the hardest thing of all is to figure out that what other people think and feel isn ' t actually exactly like what we think and feel . 
Anyone who ' s followed politics can testify to how hard that is for some people to get . 
We wanted to know if babies and young children could understand this really profound thing about other people . 
Now the question is : How could we ask them ? 
Babies , after all , can ' t talk , and if you ask a three year-old to tell you what he thinks , what you ' ll get is a beautiful stream of consciousness monologue about ponies and birthdays and things like that . 
So how do we actually ask them the question ? 
Well it turns out that the secret was broccoli . 
What we did -- Betty Rapacholi , who was one of my students , and I -- was actually to give the babies two bowls of food : one bowl of raw broccoli and one bowl of delicious goldfish crackers . 
Now all of the babies , even in Berkley , like the crackers and don ' t like the raw broccoli . 
( Laughter ) But then what Betty did was to take a little taste of food from each bowl . 
And she would act as if she liked it or she didn ' t . 
So half the time , she acted as if she liked the crackers and didn ' t like the broccoli -- just like a baby and any other sane person . 
But half the time , what she would do is take a little bit of the broccoli and go , " Mmmmm , broccoli . 
I tasted the broccoli. Mmmmm. " 
And then she would take a little bit of the crackers , and she ' d go , " Eww , yuck , crackers . 
I tasted the crackers. Eww , yuck. " 
So she ' d act as if what she wanted was just the opposite of what the babies wanted . 
We did this with 15 and 18 month-old babies . 
And then she would simply put her hand out and say , " Can you give me some ? " 
So the question is : What would the baby give her , what they liked or what she liked ? 
And the remarkable thing was that 18 month-old babies , just barely walking and talking , would give her the crackers if she liked the crackers , but they would give her the broccoli if she liked the broccoli . 
On the other hand , 15 month-olds would stare at her for a long time if she acted as if she liked the broccoli , like they couldn ' t figure this out . 
But then after they stared for a long time , they would just give her the crackers , what they thought everybody must like . 
So there are two really remarkable things about this . 
The first one is that these little 18 month-old babies have already discovered this really profound fact about human nature , that we don ' t always want the same thing . 
And what ' s more , they felt that they should actually do things to help other people get what they wanted . 
Even more remarkably though , the fact that 15 month-olds didn ' t do this suggests that these 18 month-olds had learned this deep , profound fact about human nature in the three months from when they were 15 months old . 
So children both know more and learn more than we ever would have thought . 
And this is just one of hundreds and hundreds of studies over the last 20 years that ' s actually demonstrated it . 
The question you might ask though is : Why do children learn so much ? 
And how is it possible for them to learn so much in such a short time ? 
I mean , after all , if you look at babies superficially , they seem pretty useless . 
And actually in many ways , they ' re worse than useless , because we have to put so much time and energy into just keeping them alive . 
But if we turn to evolution for an answer to this puzzle of why we spend so much time taking care of useless babies , it turns out that there ' s actually an answer . 
If we look across many , many different species of animals , not just us primates , but also including other mammals , birds , even marsupials like kangaroos and wombats , it turns out that there ' s a relationship between how long a childhood a species has and how big their brains are compared to their bodies and how smart and flexible they are . 
And sort of the posterbirds for this idea are the birds up there . 
On one side is a New Caledonian crow . 
And crows and other corvidae , ravens , rooks and so forth , are incredibly smart birds . 
They ' re as smart as chimpanzees in some respects . 
And this is a bird on the cover of science who ' s learned how to use a tool to get food . 
On the other hand , we have our friend the domestic chicken . 
And chickens and ducks and geese and turkeys are basically as dumb as dumps . 
So they ' re very , very good at pecking for grain , and they ' re not much good at doing anything else . 
Well it turns out that the babies , the New Caledonian crow babies , are fledglings . 
They depend on their moms to drop worms in their little open mouths for as long as two years , which is a really long time in the life of a bird . 
Whereas the chickens are actually mature within a couple of months . 
So childhood is the reason why the crows end up on the cover of Science and the chickens end up in the soup pot . 
There ' s something about that long childhood that seems to be connected to knowledge and learning . 
Well what kind of explanation could we have for this ? 
Well some animals , like the chicken , seem to be beautifully suited to doing just one thing very well . 
So they seem to be beautifully suited to pecking grain in one environment . 
Other creatures , like the crows , aren ' t very good at doing anything in particular , but they ' re extremely good at learning about laws of different environments . 
And of course , we human beings are way out on the end of the distribution like the crows . 
We have bigger brains relative to our bodies by far than any other animal . 
We ' re smarter , we ' re more flexible , we can learn more , we survive in more different environments , we migrated to cover the world and even go to outer space . 
And our babies and children are dependent on us for much longer than the babies of any other species . 
My son is 23 . 
( Laughter ) And at least until they ' re 23 , we ' re still popping those worms into those little open mouths . 
All right , why would we see this correlation ? 
Well an idea is that that strategy , that learning strategy , is an extremely powerful , great strategy for getting on in the world , but it has one big disadvantage . 
And that one big disadvantage is that , until you actually do all that learning , you ' re going to be helpless . 
So you don ' t want to have the mastodon charging at you and be saying to yourself , " A slingshot or maybe a spear might work. Which would actually be better ? " 
You want to know all that before the mastodons actually show up . 
And the way the evolutions seems to have solved that problem is with a kind of division of labor . 
So the idea is that we have this early period when we ' re completely protected . 
We don ' t have to do anything. All we have to do is learn . 
And then as adults , we can take all those things that we learned when we were babies and children and actually put them to work to do things out there in the world . 
So one way of thinking about it is that babies and young children are like the research and development division of the human species . 
So they ' re the protected blue sky guys who just have to go out and learn and have good ideas , and we ' re production and marketing . 
We have to take all those ideas that we learned when we were children and actually put them to use . 
Another way of thinking about it is instead of thinking of babies and children as being like defective grownups , we should think about them as being a different developmental stage of the same species -- kind of like caterpillars and butterflies -- except that they ' re actually the brilliant butterflies who are flitting around the garden and exploring , and we ' re the caterpillars who are inching along our narrow , grownup , adult path . 
If this is true , if these babies are designed to learn -- and this evolutionary story would say children are for learning , that ' s what they ' re for -- we might expect that they would have really powerful learning mechanisms . 
And in fact , the baby ' s brain seems to be the most powerful learning computer on the planet . 
But real computers are actually getting to be a lot better . 
And there ' s been a revolution in our understanding of machine learning recently . 
And it all depends on the ideas of this guy , the Reverend Thomas Bayes , who was a statistician and mathematician in the 18th century . 
And essentially what Bayes did was to provide a mathematical way using probability theory to characterize , describe , the way that scientists find out about the world . 
So what scientists do is they have a hypothesis that they think might be likely to start with . 
They go out and test it against the evidence . 
The evidence makes them change that hypothesis . 
Then they test that new hypothesis and so on and so forth . 
And what Bayes showed was a mathematical way that you could do that . 
And that mathematics is at the core of the best machine learning programs that we have now . 
And some 10 years ago , I suggested that babies might be doing the same thing . 
So if you want to know what ' s going on underneath those beautiful brown eyes , I think it actually looks something like this . 
This is Reverend Bayes ' s notebook . 
So I think those babies are actually making complicated calculations with conditional probabilities that they ' re revising to figure out how the world works . 
All right , now that might seem like an even taller order to actually demonstrate . 
Because after all , if you ask even grownups about statistics , they look extremely stupid . 
How could it be that children are doing statistics ? 
So to test this we used a machine that we have called the Blicket Detector . 
This is a box that lights up and plays music when you put some things on it and not others . 
And using this very simple machine , my lab and others have done dozens of studies showing just how good babies are at learning about the world . 
Let me mention just one that we did with Tumar Kushner , my student . 
If I showed you this detector , you would be likely to think to begin with that the way to make the detector go would be to put a block on top of the detector . 
But actually , this detector works in a bit of a strange way . 
Because if you wave a block over the top of the detector , something you wouldn ' t ever think of to begin with , the detector will actually activate two out of three times . 
Whereas , if you do the likely thing , put the block on the detector , it will only activate two out of six times . 
So the unlikely hypothesis actually has stronger evidence . 
It looks as if the waving is a more effective strategy than the other strategy . 
So we did just this ; we gave four year-olds this pattern of evidence , and we just asked them to make it go . 
And sure enough , the four year-olds used the evidence to wave the object on top of the detector . 
Now there are two things that are really interesting about this . 
The first one is , again , remember , these are four year-olds . 
They ' re just learning how to count . 
But unconsciously , they ' re doing these quite complicated calculations that will give them a conditional probability measure . 
And the other interesting thing is that they ' re using that evidence to get to an idea , get to a hypothesis about the world , that seems very unlikely to begin with . 
And in studies we ' ve just been doing in my lab , similar studies , we ' ve show that four year-olds are actually better at finding out an unlikely hypothesis than adults are when we give them exactly the same task . 
So in these circumstances , the children are using statistics to find out about the world , but after all , scientists also do experiments , and we wanted to see if children are doing experiments . 
When children do experiments we call it " getting into everything " or else " playing. " 
And there ' s been a bunch of interesting studies recently that have shown this playing around is really a kind of experimental research program . 
Here ' s one from Cristine Legare ' s lab . 
What Cristine did was use our Blicket Detectors . 
And what she did was show children that yellow ones made it go and red ones didn ' t , and then she showed them an anomaly . 
And what you ' ll see is that this little boy will go through five hypotheses in the space of two minutes . 
( Video ) Boy : How about this ? 
Same as the other side . 
Alison Gopnik : Okay , so his first hypothesis has just been falsified . 
( Laughter ) Boy : This one lighted up , and this one nothing . 
AG : Okay , he ' s got his experimental notebook out . 
Boy : What ' s making this light up . 
( Laughter ) I don ' t know . 
AG : Every scientist will recognize that expression of despair . 
( Laughter ) Boy : Oh , it ' s because this needs to be like this , and this needs to be like this . 
AG : Okay , hypothesis two . 
Boy : That ' s why . 
Oh . 
( Laughter ) AG : Now this is his next idea . 
He told the experimenter to do this , to try putting it out onto the other location . 
Not working either . 
Boy : Oh , because the light goes only to here , not here . 
Oh , the bottom of this box has electricity in here , but this doesn ' t have electricity . 
AG : Okay , that ' s a fourth hypothesis . 
Boy : It ' s lighting up . 
So when you put four . 
So you put four on this one to make it light up and two on this one to make it light up . 
AG : Okay , there ' s his fifth hypothesis . 
Now that is a particularly -- that is a particularly adorable and articulate little boy , but what Cristine discovered is this is actually quite typical . 
If you look at the way children play , when you ask them to explain something , what they really do is do a series of experiments . 
This is actually pretty typical of four year-olds . 
Well , what ' s it like to be this kind of creature ? 
What ' s it like to be one of these brilliant butterflies who can test five hypotheses in two minutes ? 
Well , if you go back to those psychologists and philosophers , a lot of them have said that babies and young children were barely conscious if they were conscious at all . 
And I think just the opposite is true . 
I think babies and children are actually more conscious than we are as adults . 
Now here ' s what we know about how adult consciousness works . 
And adults ' attention and consciousness look kind of like a spotlight . 
So what happens for adults is we decide that something ' s relevant or important , we should pay attention to it . 
Our consciousness of that thing that we ' re attending to becomes extremely bright and vivid , and everything else sort of goes dark . 
And we even know something about the way the brain does this . 
So what happens when we pay attention is that the prefrontal cortex , the sort of executive part of our brains , sends a signal that makes a little part of our brain much more flexible , more plastic , better at learning , and shuts down activity in all the rest of our brains . 
So we have a very focused , purpose-driven kind of attention . 
If we look at babies and young children , we see something very different . 
I think babies and young children seem to have more of a lantern of consciousness than a spotlight of consciousness . 
So babies and young children are very bad at narrowing down to just one thing . 
But they ' re very good at taking in lots of information from lots of different sources at once . 
And if you actually look in their brains , you see that they ' re flooded with these neurotransmitters that are really good at inducing learning and plasticity , and the inhibitory parts haven ' t come on yet . 
So when we say that babies and young children are bad at paying attention , what we really mean is that they ' re bad at not paying attention . 
So they ' re bad at getting rid of all the interesting things that could tell them something and just looking at the thing that ' s important . 
That ' s the kind of attention , the kind of consciousness , that we might expect from those butterflies who are designed to learn . 
Well if we want to think about a way of getting a taste of that kind of baby consciousness as adults , I think the best thing is think about cases where we ' re put in a new situation that we ' ve never been in before -- when we fall in love with someone new , or when we ' re in a new city for the first time . 
And what happens then is not that our consciousness contracts , it expands , so that those three days in Paris seem to be more full of consciousness and experience than all the months of being a walking , talking , faculty meeting-attending zombie back home . 
And by the way , that coffee , that wonderful coffee you ' ve been drinking downstairs , actually mimics the effect of those baby neurotransmitters . 
So what ' s it like to be a baby ? 
It ' s like being in love in Paris for the first time after you ' ve had three double-espressos . 
( Laughter ) That ' s a fantastic way to be , but it does tend to leave you waking up crying at three o ' clock in the morning . 
( Laughter ) Now it ' s good to be a grownup . 
I don ' t want to say too much about how wonderful babies are . 
It ' s good to be a grownup . 
We can do things like tie our shoelaces and cross the street by ourselves . 
And it makes sense that we put a lot of effort into making babies think like adults do . 
But if what we want is to be like those butterflies , to have open-mindedness , open learning , imagination , creativity , innovation , maybe at least some of the time we should be getting the adults to start thinking more like children . 
You all know the truth of what I ' m going to say . 
I think the intuition that inequality is divisive and socially corrosive has been around since before the French Revolution . 
What ' s changed is we now can look at the evidence , we can compare societies , more and less equal societies , and see what inequality does . 
I ' m going to take you through that data and then explain why the links I ' m going to be showing you exist . 
But first , see what a miserable lot we are . 
( Laughter ) I want to start though with a paradox . 
This shows you life expectancy against gross national income -- how rich countries are on average . 
And you see the countries on the right , like Norway and the USA , are twice as rich as Israel , Greece , Portugal on the left . 
And it makes no difference to their life expectancy at all . 
There ' s no suggestion of a relationship there . 
But if we look within our societies , there are extraordinary social gradients in health running right across society . 
This , again , is life expectancy . 
These are small areas of England and Wales -- the poorest on the right , the richest on the left . 
A lot of difference between the poor and the rest of us . 
Even the people just below the top have less good health than the people at the top . 
So income means something very important within our societies , and nothing between them . 
The explanation of that paradox is that , within our societies , we ' re looking at relative income or social position , social status -- where we are in relation to each other and the size of the gaps between us . 
And as soon as you ' ve got that idea , you should immediately wonder : what happens if we widen the differences , or compress them , make the income differences bigger or smaller ? 
And that ' s what I ' m going to show you . 
I ' m not using any hypothetical data . 
I ' m taking data from the U.N. -- it ' s the same as the World Bank has -- on the scale of income differences in these rich developed market democracies . 
The measure we ' ve used , because it ' s easy to understand and you can download it , is how much richer the top 20 percent than the bottom 20 percent in each country . 
And you see in the more equal countries on the left -- Japan , Finland , Norway , Sweden -- the top 20 percent are about three and a half , four times as rich as the bottom 20 percent . 
But on the more unequal end -- U.K. , Portugal , USA , Singapore -- the differences are twice as big . 
On that measure , we are twice as unequal as some of the other successful market democracies . 
Now I ' m going to show you what that does to our societies . 
We collected data on problems with social gradients , the kind of problems that are more common at the bottom of the social ladder . 
Internationally comparable data on life expectancy , on kids ' maths and literacy scores , on infant mortality rates , homicide rates , proportion of the population in prison , teenage birthrates , levels of trust , obesity , mental illness -- which in standard diagnostic classification includes drug and alcohol addiction -- and social mobility . 
We put them all in one index . 
They ' re all weighted equally . 
And there , you see it in relation to the measure of inequality I ' ve just shown you , which I shall use over and over again in the data . 
The more unequal countries are doing worse on all these kinds of social problems . 
It ' s an extraordinarily close correlation . 
But if you look at that same index of health and social problems in relation to GNP per capita , gross national income , there ' s nothing there , no correlation anymore . 
We were a little bit worried that people might think we ' d been choosing problems to suit our argument and just manufactured this evidence , so we also did a paper in the British Medical Journal on the UNICEF index of child well-being . 
It has 40 different components put together by other people . 
It contains whether kids can talk to their parents , whether they have books at home , what immunization rates are like , whether there ' s bullying at school . 
Everything goes into it . 
Here it is in relation to that same measure of inequality . 
Kids do worse in the more unequal societies . 
Highly significant relationship . 
But once again , if you look at that measure of child well-being , in relation to national income per person , there ' s no relationship , no suggestion of a relationship . 
What all the data I ' ve shown you so far says is the same thing . 
The average well-being of our societies is not dependent any longer on national income and economic growth . 
That ' s very important in poorer countries , but not in the rich developed world . 
But the differences between us and where we are in relation to each other now matter very much . 
I ' m going to show you some of the separate bits of our index . 
Here , for instance , is trust . 
It ' s simply the proportion of the population who agree most people can be trusted . 
It comes from the World Values Survey . 
You see , at the more unequal end , it ' s about 15 percent of the population who feel they can trust others . 
But in the more equal societies , it rises to 60 or 65 percent . 
And if you look at measures of involvement in community life or social capital , very similar relationships closely related to inequality . 
I may say , we did all this work twice . 
We did it first on these rich , developed countries , and then as a separate test bed , we repeated it all on the 50 American states -- asking just the same question : do the more unequal states do worse on all these kinds of measures ? 
So here is trust from a general social survey of the federal government related to inequality . 
Very similar scatter over a similar range of levels of trust . 
Same thing is going on . 
Basically we found that almost anything that ' s related to trust internationally is related to trust amongst the 50 states in that separate test bed . 
We ' re not just talking about a fluke . 
This is mental illness . 
WHO put together figures using the same diagnostic interviews on random samples of the population to allow us to compare rates of mental illness in each society . 
This is the percent of the population with any mental illness in the preceding year . 
And it goes from about eight percent up to three times that -- whole societies with three times the level of mental illness of others . 
And again , closely related to inequality . 
This is violence . 
These red dots are American states , and the blue triangles are Canadian provinces . 
But look at the scale of the differences . 
It goes from 15 homicides per million up to 150 . 
This is the proportion of the population in prison . 
There ' s a about a tenfold difference there , log scale up the side . 
But it goes from about 40 to 400 people in prison . 
That relationship is not mainly driven by more crime . 
In some places , that ' s part of it . 
But most of it is about more punitive sentencing , harsher sentencing . 
And the more unequal societies are more likely also to retain the death penalty . 
Here we have children dropping out of high school . 
Again , quite big differences . 
Extraordinarily damaging , if you ' re talking about using the talents of the population . 
This is social mobility . 
It ' s actually a measure of mobility based on income . 
Basically , it ' s asking : do rich fathers have rich sons and poor fathers have poor sons , or is there no relationship between the two ? 
And at the more unequal end , fathers ' income is much more important -- in the U.K. , USA . 
And in Scandinavian countries , fathers ' income is much less important . 
There ' s more social mobility . 
And as we like to say -- and I know there are a lot of Americans in the audience here -- if Americans want to live the American dream , they should go to Denmark . 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) I ' ve shown you just a few things in italics here . 
I could have shown a number of other problems . 
They ' re all problems that tend to be more common at the bottom of the social gradient . 
But there are endless problems with social gradients that are worse in more unequal countries -- not just a little bit worse , but anything from twice as common to 10 times as common . 
Think of the expense , the human cost of that . 
I want to go back though to this graph that I showed you earlier where we put it all together to make two points . 
One is that , in graph after graph , we find the countries that do worse , whatever the outcome , seem to be the more unequal ones , and the ones that do well seem to be the Nordic countries and Japan . 
So what we ' re looking at is general social disfunction related to inequality . 
It ' s not just one or two things that go wrong , it ' s most things . 
The other really important point I want to make on this graph is that , if you look at the bottom , Sweden and Japan , they ' re very different countries in all sorts of ways . 
The position of women , how closely they keep to the nuclear family , are on opposite ends of the poles in terms of the rich developed world . 
But another really important difference is how they get their greater equality . 
Sweden has huge differences in earnings , and it narrows the gap through taxation , general welfare state , generous benefits and so on . 
Japan is rather different though . 
It starts off with much smaller differences in earnings before tax . 
It has lower taxes . 
It has a smaller welfare state . 
And in our analysis of the American states , we find rather the same contrast . 
There are some states that do well through redistribution , some states that do well because they have smaller income differences before tax . 
So we conclude that it doesn ' t much matter how you get your greater equality , as long as you get there somehow . 
I am not talking about perfect equality , I ' m talking about what exists in rich developed market democracies . 
Another really surprising part of this picture is that it ' s not just the poor who are affected by inequality . 
There seems to be some truth in John Donne ' s " No man is an island. " 
And in a number of studies , it ' s possible to compare how people do in more and less equal countries at each level in the social hierarchy . 
This is just one example . 
It ' s infant mortality . 
Some Swedes very kindly classified a lot of their infant deaths according to the British register of general socioeconomic classification . 
And so it ' s anachronistically a classification by fathers ' occupations , so single parents go on their own . 
But then where it says " low social class , " that ' s unskilled manual occupations . 
It goes through towards the skilled manual occupations in the middle , then the junior non-manual , going up high to the professional occupations -- doctors , lawyers , directors of larger companies . 
You see there that Sweden does better than Britain all the way across the social hierarchy . 
The biggest differences are at the bottom of society . 
But even at the top , there seems to be a small benefit to being in a more equal society . 
We show that on about five different sets of data covering educational outcomes and health in the United States and internationally . 
And that seems to be the general picture -- that greater equality makes most difference at the bottom , but has some benefits even at the top . 
But I should say a few words about what ' s going on . 
I think I ' m looking and talking about the psychosocial effects of inequality . 
More to do with feelings of superiority and inferiority , of being valued and devalued , respected and disrespected . 
And of course , those feelings of the status competition that comes out of that drives the consumerism in our society . 
It also leads to status insecurity . 
We worry more about how we ' re judged and seen by others , whether we ' re regarded as attractive , clever , all that kind of thing . 
The social-evaluative judgments increase , the fear of those social-evaluative judgments . 
Interestingly , some parallel work going on in social psychology : some people reviewed 208 different studies in which volunteers had been invited into a psychological laboratory and had their stress hormones , their responses to doing stressful tasks , measured . 
And in the review , what they were interested in seeing is what kind of stresses most reliably raise levels of cortisol , the central stress hormone . 
And the conclusion was it was tasks that included social-evaluative threat -- threats to self-esteem or social status in which others can negatively judge your performance . 
Those kind of stresses have a very particular effect on the physiology of stress . 
Now we have been criticized . 
Of course , there are people who dislike this stuff and people who find it very surprising . 
I should tell you though that when people criticize us for picking and choosing data , we never pick and choose data . 
We have an absolute rule that if our data source has data for one of the countries we ' re looking at , it goes into the analysis . 
Our data source decides whether it ' s reliable data , we don ' t . 
Otherwise that would introduce bias . 
What about other countries ? 
There are 200 studies of health in relation to income and equality in the academic peer-reviewed journals . 
This isn ' t confined to these countries here , hiding a very simple demonstration . 
The same countries , the same measure of inequality , one problem after another . 
Why don ' t we control for other factors ? 
Well we ' ve shown you that GNP per capita doesn ' t make any difference . 
And of course , others using more sophisticated methods in the literature have controlled for poverty and education and so on . 
What about causality ? 
Correlation in itself doesn ' t prove causality . 
We spend a good bit of time . 
And indeed , people know the causal links quite well in some of these outcomes . 
The big change in our understanding of drivers of chronic health in the rich developed world is how important chronic stress from social sources is affecting the immune system , the cardiovascular system . 
Or for instance , the reason why violence becomes more common in more unequal societies is because people are sensitive to being looked down on . 
I should say that to deal with this , we ' ve got to deal with the post-tax things and the pre-tax things . 
We ' ve got to constrain income , the bonus culture incomes at the top . 
I think we must make our bosses accountable to their employees in any way we can . 
I think the take-home message though is that we can improve the real quality of human life by reducing the differences in incomes between us . 
Suddenly we have a handle on the psychosocial well-being of whole societies , and that ' s exciting . 
I moved to Boston 10 years ago from Chicago , with an interest in cancer and in chemistry . 
You might know that chemistry is the science of making molecules or , to my taste , new drugs for cancer . 
And you might also know that , for science and medicine , Boston is a bit of a candy store . 
You can ' t roll a stop sign in Cambridge without hitting a graduate student . 
The bar is called the Miracle of Science . 
The billboards say " Lab Space Available. " 
And it ' s fair to say that in these 10 years , we ' ve witnessed absolutely the start of a scientific revolution -- that of genome medicine . 
We know more about the patients that enter our clinic now than ever before . 
And we ' re able , finally , to answer the question that ' s been so pressing for so many years : Why do I have cancer ? 
This information is also pretty staggering . 
You might know that , so far , in just the dawn of this revolution , we know that there are perhaps 40,000 unique mutations affecting more than 10,000 genes , and that there are 500 of these genes that are bona-fide drivers , causes of cancer . 
Yet comparatively , we have about a dozen targeted medications . 
And this inadequacy of cancer medicine really hit home when my father was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer . 
We didn ' t fly him to Boston . 
We didn ' t sequence his genome . 
It ' s been known for decades what causes this malignancy . 
It ' s three proteins : ras , myc , p53 . 
This is old information we ' ve known since about the 80s , yet there ' s no medicine I can prescribe to a patient with this or any of the numerous solid tumors caused by these three ... 
Horsemen of the Apocalypse that is cancer . 
There ' s no ras , no myc , no p53 drug . 
And you might fairly ask : Why is that ? 
And the very unsatisfying yet scientific answer is : it ' s too hard . 
That for whatever reason , these three proteins have entered a space , in the language of our field , that ' s called the undruggable genome -- which is like calling a computer unsurfable or the Moon unwalkable . 
It ' s a horrible term of trade . 
But what it means is that we ' ve failed to identify a greasy pocket in these proteins , into which we , like molecular locksmiths , can fashion an active , small , organic molecule or drug substance . 
Now , as I was training in clinical medicine and hematology and oncology and stem-cell transplantation , what we had instead , cascading through the regulatory network at the FDA , were these substances : arsenic , thalidomide , and this chemical derivative of nitrogen mustard gas . 
And this is the 21st century . 
And so , I guess you ' d say , dissatisfied with the performance and quality of these medicines , I went back to school , in chemistry , with the idea that perhaps by learning the trade of discovery chemistry and approaching it in the context of this brave new world of the open source , the crowd source , the collaborative network that we have access to within academia , that we might more quickly bring powerful and targeted therapies to our patients . 
And so , please consider this a work in progress , but I ' d like to tell you today a story about a very rare cancer called midline carcinoma , about the undruggable protein target that causes this cancer , called BRD4 , and about a molecule developed at my lab at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute , called JQ1 , which we affectionately named for Jun Qi , the chemist that made this molecule . 
Now , BRD4 is an interesting protein . 
You might ask : with all the things cancer ' s trying to do to kill our patient , how does it remember it ' s cancer ? 
When it winds up its genome , divides into two cells and unwinds again , why does it not turn into an eye , into a liver , as it has all the genes necessary to do this ? 
It remembers that it ' s cancer . 
And the reason is that cancer , like every cell in the body , places little molecular bookmarks , little Post-it notes , that remind the cell , " I ' m cancer ; I should keep growing. " 
And those Post-it notes involve this and other proteins of its class -- so-called bromodomains . 
So we developed an idea , a rationale , that perhaps if we made a molecule that prevented the Post-it note from sticking by entering into the little pocket at the base of this spinning protein , then maybe we could convince cancer cells , certainly those addicted to this BRD4 protein , that they ' re not cancer . 
And so we started to work on this problem . 
We developed libraries of compounds and eventually arrived at this and similar substances called JQ1 . 
Now , not being a drug company , we could do certain things , we had certain flexibilities , that I respect that a pharmaceutical industry doesn ' t have . 
We just started mailing it to our friends . 
I have a small lab . 
We thought we ' d just send it to people and see how the molecule behaves . 
We sent it to Oxford , England , where a group of talented crystallographers provided this picture , which helped us understand exactly how this molecule is so potent for this protein target . 
It ' s what we call a perfect fit of shape complementarity , or hand in glove . 
Now , this is a very rare cancer , this BRD4-addicted cancer . 
And so we worked with samples of material that were collected by young pathologists at Brigham and Women ' s Hospital . 
And as we treated these cells with this molecule , we observed something really striking . 
The cancer cells -- small , round and rapidly dividing , grew these arms and extensions . 
They were changing shape . 
In effect , the cancer cell was forgetting it was cancer and becoming a normal cell . 
This got us very excited . 
The next step would be to put this molecule into mice . 
The only problem was there ' s no mouse model of this rare cancer . 
And so at the time we were doing this research , I was caring for a 29-year-old firefighter from Connecticut who was very much at the end of life with this incurable cancer . 
This BRD4-addicted cancer was growing throughout his left lung . 
And he had a chest tube in that was draining little bits of debris . 
And every nursing shift , we would throw this material out . 
And so we approached this patient and asked if he would collaborate with us . 
Could we take this precious and rare cancerous material from this chest tube and drive it across town and put it into mice and try to do a clinical trial at a stage that with a prototype drug , well , that would be , of course , impossible and , rightly , illegal to do in humans . 
At the Lurie Family Center for Animal Imaging , our colleague , Andrew Kung , grew this cancer successfully in mice without ever touching plastic . 
And you can see this PET scan of a mouse -- what we call a pet PET . 
The cancer is growing as this red , huge mass in the hind limb of this animal . 
And as we treat it with our compound , this addiction to sugar , this rapid growth , faded . 
And on the animal on the right , you see that the cancer was responding . 
We ' ve completed , now , clinical trials in four mouse models of this disease . 
The mice with this cancer that get the drug live , and the ones that don ' t rapidly perish . 
So we started to wonder , what would a drug company do at this point ? 
Well , they probably would keep this a secret until they turn the prototype drug into an active pharmaceutical substance . 
So we did just the opposite . 
We published a paper that described this finding at the earliest prototype stage . 
We gave the world the chemical identity of this molecule , typically a secret in our discipline . 
We told people exactly how to make it . 
We gave them our email address , suggesting that if they write us , we ' ll send them a free molecule . 
( Laughter ) We basically tried to create the most competitive environment for our lab as possible . 
And this was , unfortunately , successful . 
( Laughter ) Because now , we ' ve shared this molecule , just since December of last year , with 40 laboratories in the United States and 30 more in Europe -- many of them pharmaceutical companies , seeking now to enter this space , to target this rare cancer that , thankfully right now , is quite desirable to study in that industry . 
But the science that ' s coming back from all of these laboratories about the use of this molecule has provided us insights we might not have had on our own . 
Leukemia cells treated with this compound turn into normal white blood cells . 
Mice with multiple myeloma , an incurable malignancy of the bone marrow , respond dramatically to the treatment with this drug . 
You might know that fat has memory . 
( Laughter ) In fact , this molecule prevents this adipocyte , this fat stem cell , from remembering how to make fat , such that mice on a high-fat diet , like the folks in my hometown of Chicago -- ( Laughter ) fail to develop fatty liver , which is a major medical problem . 
What this research taught us -- not just my lab , but our institute , and Harvard Medical School more generally -- is that we have unique resources in academia for drug discovery ; that our center , which has tested perhaps more cancer molecules in a scientific way than any other , never made one of its own . 
For all the reasons you see listed here , we think there ' s a great opportunity for academic centers to participate in this earliest , conceptually tricky and creative discipline of prototype drug discovery . 
So what next ? 
We have this molecule , but it ' s not a pill yet . 
It ' s not orally bioavailable . 
We need to fix it so we can deliver it to our patients . 
And everyone in the lab , especially following the interaction with these patients , feels quite compelled to deliver a drug substance based on this molecule . 
It ' s here where I ' d say that we could use your help and your insights , your collaborative participation . 
Unlike a drug company , we don ' t have a pipeline that we can deposit these molecules into . 
We don ' t have a team of salespeople and marketeers to tell us how to position this drug against the other . 
What we do have is the flexibility of an academic center to work with competent , motivated , enthusiastic , hopefully well-funded people to carry these molecules forward into the clinic while preserving our ability to share the prototype drug worldwide . 
This molecule will soon leave our benches and go into a small start-up company called Tensha Therapeutics . 
And , really , this is the fourth of these molecules to kind of " graduate " from our little pipeline of drug discovery , two of which -- a topical drug for lymphoma of the skin and an oral substance for the treatment of multiple myeloma -- will actually come to the bedside for the first clinical trial in July of this year -- for us , a major and exciting milestone . 
I want to leave you with just two ideas . 
The first is : if anything is unique about this research , it ' s less the science than the strategy . 
This , for us , was a social experiment -- an experiment in " What would happen if we were as open and honest at the earliest phase of discovery chemistry research as we could be ? " 
This string of letters and numbers and symbols and parentheses that can be texted , I suppose , or Twittered worldwide , is the chemical identity of our pro compound . 
It ' s the information that we most need from pharmaceutical companies , the information on how these early prototype drugs might work . 
Yet this information is largely a secret . 
And so we seek , really , to download from the amazing successes of the computer-science industry , two principles -- that of open source and that of crowdsourcing -- to quickly , responsibly accelerate the delivery of targeted therapeutics to patients with cancer . 
Now , the business model involves all of you . 
This research is funded by the public . 
It ' s funded by foundations . 
And one thing I ' ve learned in Boston is that you people will do anything for cancer , and I love that . 
You bike across the state , you walk up and down the river . 
( Laughter ) I ' ve never seen , really , anywhere , this unique support for cancer research . 
And so I want to thank you for your participation , your collaboration and most of all , for your confidence in our ideas . 
Hi. Today , I ' m going to take you through glimpses of about eight of my projects , done in collaboration with Danish artist Soren Pors . 
We call ourselves Pors and Rao , and we live and work in India . 
I ' d like to begin with my very first object , which I call " The Uncle Phone. " 
And it was inspired by my uncle ' s peculiar habit of constantly asking me to do things for him , almost like I were an extension of his body -- to turn on the lights or to bring him a glass of water , a pack of cigarettes . 
And as I grew up , it became worse and worse , And I started to think of it as a form of control . 
But of course , I could never say anything , because the uncle is a respected figure in the Indian family . 
And the situation that irked me and mystified me the most was his use of a landline telephone . 
He would hold on to the receiver and expect me to dial a number for him . 
And so as a response and as a gift to my uncle , I made him " The Uncle Phone. " 
It ' s so long that it requires two people to use it . 
It ' s exactly the way my uncle uses a phone that ' s designed for one person . 
But the problem is that , when I left home and went to college , I started missing his commands . 
And so I made him a golden typewriter through which he could dispense his commands to nephews and nieces around the world as an email . 
So what he had to do was take a piece of paper , roll it into the carriage , type his email or command and pull the paper out . 
This device would automatically send the intended person the letter as an email . 
So here you can see , we embedded a lot of electronics that understands all of the mechanical actions and converts it to digital . 
So my uncle is only dealing with a mechanical interface . 
And of course , the object had to be very grand and have a sense of ritualism , the way my uncle likes it . 
The next work is a sound-sensitive installation that we affectionately call " The Pygmies. " 
And we wanted to work with a notion of being surrounded by a tribe of very shy , sensitive and sweet creatures . 
So how it works is we have these panels , which we have on the wall , and behind them , we have these little creatures which hide . 
And as soon as it ' s silent , they sort of creep out . 
And if it ' s even more silent , they stretch their necks out . 
And at the slightest sound , they hide back again . 
So we had these panels on three walls of a room . 
And we had over 500 of these little pygmies hiding behind them . 
So this is how it works . 
This is a video prototype . 
So when it ' s quiet , it ' s sort of coming out from behind the panels . 
And they hear like humans do , or real creatures do . 
So they get immune to sounds that scare them after awhile . 
And they don ' t react to background sounds . 
You ' ll hear a train in moment that they don ' t react to . 
( Noise ) But they react to foreground sounds. You ' ll hear that in a second . 
( Whistling ) So we worked very hard to make them as lifelike as possible . 
So each pygmy has its own behavior , psyche , mood swings , personalities and so on . 
So this is a very early prototype . 
Of course , it got much better after that . 
And we made them react to people , but we found that people were being quite playful and childlike with them . 
This is a video installation called " The Missing Person. " 
And we were quite intrigued with playing with the notion of invisibility . 
How would it be possible to experience a sense of invisibility ? 
So we worked with a company that specializes in camera surveillance , and we asked them to develop a piece of software with us , using a camera that could look at people in the room , track them and replace one person with the background , rendering them invisible . 
So I ' m just going to show you a very early prototype . 
On the right side you can see my colleague Soren , who ' s actually in the space . 
And on the left side , you ' ll see the processed video where the camera has made him invisible . 
Soren enters the room. Pop ! He goes invisible . 
And you can see that the camera is tracking him and erasing . 
It ' s a very early video , so we haven ' t yet dealt with the overlap and all of that , but that got refined pretty soon , later . 
So how we used it was in a room where we had a camera looking into the space , and we had one monitor , one on each wall . 
And as people walked into the room , they would see themselves in the monitor , except with one difference : one person was constantly invisible wherever they moved in the room . 
So this is a work called " The Sun Shadow. " 
And it was almost like a sheet of paper , like a cutout of a childlike drawing of an oil spill or a sun . 
And from the front , this object appeared to be very strong and robust , and from the side , it almost seemed very weak . 
So people would walking into the room and they ' d almost ignore it , thinking it was some crap laying around . 
But as soon as they passed by , it would start to climb up the wall in jerky fashion . 
And it would get exhausted , and it would collapse every time . 
( Laughter ) So this work is a caricature of an upside-down man . 
His head is so heavy , full of heavy thoughts , that it ' s sort of fallen into his hat , and his body ' s grown out of him almost like a plant . 
Well what he does is he moves around in a very drunken fashion on his head in a very unpredictable and extremely slow movement . 
And it ' s kind of constrained by that circle . 
Because if that circle weren ' t there , and the floor was very even , it would start to wander about in the space . 
And there ' s no wires . 
So I ' ll just show you an instance -- so when people enter the room , it activates this object . 
And it very slowly , over a few minutes , sort of painfully goes up , and then it gains momentum and it looks like it ' s almost about to fall . 
And this is an important moment , because we wanted to instill in the viewer an instinct to almost go and help , or save the subject . 
But it doesn ' t really need it , because it , again , sort of manages to pull itself up . 
So this work was a real technical challenge for us , and we worked very hard , like most of our works , over years to get the mechanics right and the equilibrium and the dynamics . 
And it was very important for us to establish the exact moment that it would fall , because if we made it in a way that it would topple over , then it would damage itself , and if it didn ' t fall enough , it wouldn ' t instill that fatalism , or that sense of wanting to go and help it . 
So I ' m going to show you a very quick video where we are doing a test scenario -- it ' s much faster . 
That ' s my colleague. He ' s let it go . 
Now he ' s getting nervous , so he ' s going to go catch it . 
But he doesn ' t need to , because it manages to lift itself up on its own . 
So this is a work that we were very intrigued with , working with the aesthetic of fur embedded with thousands of tiny different sizes of fiber optics , which twinkle like the night sky . 
And it ' s at the scale of the night sky . 
So we wrapped this around a blob-like form , which is in the shape of a teddy bear , which was hanging from the ceiling . 
And the idea was to sort of contrast something very cold and distant and abstract like the universe into the familiar form of a teddy bear , which is very comforting and intimate . 
And the idea was that at some point you would stop looking at the form of a teddy bear and you would almost perceive it to be a hole in the space , and as if you were looking out into the twinkling night sky . 
So this is the last work , and a work in progress , and it ' s called " Space Filler. " 
Well imagine a small cube that ' s about this big standing in front of you in the middle of the room , and as you approached it , it tried to intimidate you by growing into a cube that ' s twice its height and [ eight ] times its volume . 
And so this object is constantly expanding and contracting to create a dynamic with people moving around it -- almost like it were trying to conceal a secret within its seams or something . 
So we work with a lot of technology , but we don ' t really love technology , because it gives us a lot of pain in our work over years and years . 
But we use it because we ' re interested in the way that it can help us to express the emotions and behavioral patterns in these creatures that we create . 
And once a creature pops into our minds , it ' s almost like the process of creation is to discover the way this creature really wants to exist and what form it wants to take and what way it wants to move . 
I started Improv Everywhere about 10 years ago when I moved to New York City with an interest in acting and comedy . 
Because I was new to the city , I didn ' t have access to a stage , so I decided to create my own in public places . 
So the first project we ' re going to take a look at is the very first No Pants Subway Ride . 
Now , this took place in January of 2002 . 
And this woman is the star of the video . 
She doesn ' t know she ' s being filmed . 
She ' s being filmed with a hidden camera . 
This is on the 6 train in New York City . 
And this is the first stop along the line . 
These are two Danish guys who come in and sit down next to the hidden camera . 
And that ' s me right there in a brown coat . 
I ' m wearing a hat. I ' m wearing a scarf . 
( Laughter ) And as you ' ll see now , I ' m not wearing pants . 
( Laughter ) At this point -- at this point she ' s noticed me , but in New York there ' s weirdos on any given train car . 
One person ' s not that unusual . 
She goes back to reading her book , which is unfortunately titled " Rape. " 
( Laughter ) So she ' s noticed the unusual thing , but she ' s gone back to her normal life . 
Now , in the meantime , I have six friends who are waiting at the next six consecutive stops in their underwear as well . 
They ' re going to be entering this car one by one . 
And we ' ll act as if it ' s just an unfortunate mistake we ' ve made , forgetting our pants on this cold January day . 
( Laughter ) ( Laughter continues ) So at this point , she decides to put the rape book away . 
( Laughter ) And she decides to be a little bit more aware of her surroundings . 
In the meantime , the two Danish guys to the left of the camera , they ' re cracking up . 
They think this is the funniest thing they ' ve ever seen before . 
( Laughter ) And I love that moment in this video , because before it became a shared experience , it was something that was maybe a little bit scary , or something that was at least confusing to her . 
And then , once it became a shared experience , it was funny and something that she could laugh at . 
So the train is now pulling into the third stop along the 6 line . 
( Laughter ) So the video won ' t show everything . 
This goes on for another four stops . 
At the eighth stop , a girl came in with a giant duffel bag and announced she had pants for sale for a dollar -- like you might sell batteries or candy on the train . 
We all very matter-of-factly bought a pair of pants , put them on and said , " Thank you. That ' s exactly what I needed today , " and then exited without revealing what had happened and went in all different directions . 
So that ' s a still from the video there . 
And I love that girl ' s reaction so much . 
And watching that videotape later that day inspired me to keep doing what I do . 
And really one of the points of Improv Everywhere is to cause a scene in a public place that is a positive experience for other people . 
It ' s a prank , but it ' s a prank that gives somebody a great story to tell . 
And her reaction inspired me to do a second annual No Pants Subway Ride . 
And we ' ve continued to do it every year . 
This January , we did the 10th annual No Pants Subway Ride where a diverse group of 3,500 people rode the train in their underwear in New York -- almost every single train line in the city . 
And also in 50 other cities around the world , people participated . 
( Laughter ) As I started taking improv class at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater and meeting other creative people and other performers and comedians , I started amassing a mailing list of people who wanted to do these types of projects . 
So I could do more large-scale projects . 
Well , one day I was walking through Union Square , and I saw this building , which had just been built in 2005 . 
There was a girl in one of the windows and she was dancing . 
It was very peculiar , because it was dark out , but she was backlit with florescent lighting . 
She was very much onstage and I couldn ' t figure out why she was doing it . 
After about 15 seconds , her friend appeared -- she had been hiding behind a display . 
They laughed , hugged each other and ran away . 
Maybe she had been dared to do this . 
Looking at the entire facade -- there were 70 total windows -- and I knew what I had to do . 
( Laughter ) So this project is called Look Up More . 
We had 70 actors dress in black . 
We didn ' t let the stores know we were coming . 
And I stood in the park giving signals . 
The first signal was for everybody to hold up these four-foot tall letters that spelled out " Look Up More , " the name of the project . 
The second signal was for everybody to do jumping jacks together . 
You ' ll see that start right here . 
( Laughter ) And then we had dancing. We had everyone dance . 
And then we had dance solos where only one person would dance and everybody would point to them . 
( Laughter ) So then I gave a new hand signal , which signaled the next soloist down below in Forever 21 , and he danced . 
There were several other activities . 
We had people jumping up and down , people dropping to the ground . 
And I was standing just anonymously in a sweatshirt , putting my hand on and off of a trashcan to signal the advancement . 
And because it was in Union Square Park , right by a subway station , there were hundreds of people by the end who stopped and looked up and watched what we were doing . 
There ' s a better photo of it . 
So that particular event was inspired by a moment that I happened to stumble upon . 
The next project I want to show was given to me in an email from a stranger . 
A high school kid in Texas wrote me in 2006 and said , " You should get as many people as possible to put on blue polo shirts and khaki pants and go into a Best Buy and stand around. " 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) So I wrote this high school kid back immediately and I said , " Yes , you are correct . 
I think I ' ll try to do that this weekend. Thank you. " 
So here ' s the video . 
So again , this is 2005 . 
We had about 80 people show up to participate , entering one by one . 
There was an eight-year-old girl , a 10-year-old girl . 
There was also a 65-year-old man who participated . 
So a very diverse group of people . 
( Laughter ) And I told people , " Don ' t work. Don ' t actually do work . 
But also , don ' t shop . 
Just stand around and don ' t face products. " 
Now you can see the regular employees by the ones that have the yellow tags on their shirt . 
Everybody else is one of our actors . 
( Laughter ) The lower-level employees thought it was very funny . 
Several of them went to go get their camera from the break room and took photos with us . 
A lot of them made jokes about trying to get us to go to the back to get heavy television sets for customers . 
The managers and the security guards , on the other hand , did not find it particularly funny . 
You can see them in this footage . 
And we were there probably 10 minutes before the managers decided to dial 911 . 
( Laughter ) So they started running around telling everybody the cops were coming , " Watch out , the cops are coming. " 
And you can see the cops in this footage right here . 
That ' s a cop wearing black right there , being filmed with a hidden camera . 
Ultimately , the police had to inform Best Buy management that it was not , in fact , illegal to wear a blue polo shirt and khaki pants . 
( Laughter ) ( Applause ) Thank you . 
( Applause ) So we had been there for 20 minutes ; we were happy to exit the store . 
One thing the managers were trying to do was to track down our cameras . 
And they caught a couple of my guys who had hidden cameras in duffel bags . 
But the one camera guy they never caught was the guy that went in just with a blank tape and went over to the Best Buy camera department and just put his tape in one of their cameras and pretended to shop . 
So I like that concept of using their own technology against them . 
( Laughter ) I think our best projects are ones that are site-specific and happen at a particular place for a reason . 
And one morning , I was riding the subway . 
I had to make a transfer at the 53rd St. stop where there are these two giant escalators . 
And it ' s a very depressing place to be in the morning , it ' s very crowded . 
So I decided to try and stage something that could make it as happy as possible for one morning . 
So this was in the winter of 2009 -- 8:30 in the morning . 
It ' s morning rush hour . 
It ' s very cold outside . 
People are coming in from Queens , transferring from the E train to the 6 train . 
And they ' re going up these giant escalators on their way to their jobs . 
[ Rob wants ] [ to give you ] ( Laughter ) [ a high five ! ] ( Laughter ) [ Get ready ! ] ( Laughter ) ( Applause ) Thank you . 
So there ' s a photograph that illustrates it a little bit better . 
He gave 2,000 high fives that day , and he washed his hands before and afterward and did not get sick . 
And that was done also without permission , although no one seemed to care . 
So I ' d say over the years , one of the most common criticisms I see of Improv Everywhere left anonymously on YouTube comments is : " These people have too much time on their hands. " 
And you know , not everybody ' s going to like everything you do , and I ' ve certainly developed a thick skin thanks to Internet comments , but that one ' s always bothered me , because we don ' t have too much time on our hands . 
The participants in Improv Everywhere events have just as much leisure time as any other New Yorkers , they just occasionally choose to spend it in an unusual way . 
You know , every Saturday and Sunday , hundreds of thousands of people each fall gather in football stadiums to watch games . 
And I ' ve never seen anybody comment , looking at a football game , " All those people in the stands , they have too much time on their hands. " 
And of course they don ' t . 
It ' s a perfectly wonderful way to spent a weekend afternoon , watching a football game in a stadium . 
But I think it ' s also a perfectly valid way to spend an afternoon freezing in place with 200 people in the Grand Central terminal or dressing up like a ghostbuster and running through the New York Public Library . 
( Laughter ) Or listening to the same MP3 as 3,000 other people and dancing silently in a park , or bursting into song in a grocery store as part of a spontaneous musical , or diving into the ocean in Coney Island wearing formal attire . 
( Laughter ) You know , as kids , we ' re taught to play . 
And we ' re never given a reason why we should play . 
It ' s just acceptable that play is a good thing . 
It ' s that there is no point and that there doesn ' t have to be a point . 
We don ' t need a reason. As long as it ' s fun and it seems like it ' s going to be a funny idea and it seems like the people who witness it will also have a fun time , then that ' s enough for us . 
And I think , as adults , we need to learn that there ' s no right or wrong way to play . 
I was offered a position as associate professor of medicine and chief of scientific visualization at Yale University in the department of medicine . 
And my job was to write many of the algorithms and code for NASA to do virtual surgery in preparation for the astronauts going into deep-space flight , so they could be kept in robotic pods . 
One of the fascinating things about what we were working on is that we were seeing , using new scanning technologies , things that had never been seen before . 
Not only in disease management , but also things that allowed us to see things about the body that just made you marvel . 
I remember one of the first times we were looking at collagen . 
And your entire body , everything -- your hair , skin , bone , nails -- everything is made of collagen . 
And it ' s a kind of rope-like structure that twirls and swirls like this . 
And the only place that collagen changes its structure is in the cornea of your eye . 
In your eye , it becomes a grid formation , and therefore , it becomes transparent , as opposed to opaque . 
So perfectly organized a structure , it was hard not to attribute divinity to it . 
Because we kept on seeing this in different parts of the body . 
One of the opportunities I had was one person was working on a really interesting micromagnetic resonance imaging machine with the NIH . 
And what we were going to do was scan a new project on the development of the fetus from conception to birth using these new technologies . 
So I wrote the algorithms and code , and he built the hardware -- Paul Lauterbur -- then went onto win the Nobel Prize for inventing the MRI . 
I got the data . 
And I ' m going to show you a sample of the piece , " From Conception to Birth. " 
( Music ) [ From Conception to Birth ] [ Oocyte ] [ Sperm ] [ Egg Inseminated ] [ 24 Hours : Baby ' s first division ] [ The fertilized ovum divides a few hours after fusion ... ] [ And divides anew every 12 to 15 hours. ] [ Early Embryo ] [ Yolk sack still feeding baby. ] [ 25 Days : Heart chamber developing. ] [ 32 Days : Arms & amp ; amp ; hands are developing ] [ 36 Days : Beginning of the primitive vertebrae ] [ These weeks are the period of the most rapid development of the fetus. ] [ If the fetus continues to grow at this speed for the entire 9 months , it would be 1.5 tons at birth. ] [ 45 Days ] [ Embryo ' s heart is beating twice as fast as the mother ' s. ] [ 51 Days ] [ Developing retina , nose and fingers ] [ The fetus ' continual movement in the womb is necessary for muscular and skeletal growth. ] [ 12 Weeks : Indifferent penis ] [ Girl or boy yet to be determined ] [ 8 Months ] [ Delivery : The expulsion stage ] [ The moment of birth ] ( Applause ) Alexander Tsiaras : Thank you . 
But as you can see , when you actually start working on this data , it ' s pretty spectacular . 
And as we kept on scanning more and more , working on this project , looking at these two simple cells that have this unbelievable machinery that will become the magic of you . 
And as we kept on working on this data , looking at small clusters of the body , these little pieces of tissue that were the trophoblasts coming off of the blastocyst , all of a sudden burrowing itself into the side of the uterus , saying , " I ' m here to stay. " 
Having conversation and communications with the estrogens , the progesterones , saying , " I ' m here to stay , plant me , " building this incredible trilinear fetus that becomes , within 44 days , something that you can recognize , and then at nine weeks is really kind of a little human being . 
The marvel of this information : How do we actually have this biological mechanism inside our body to actually see this information ? 
I ' m going to show you something pretty unique . 
Here ' s a human heart at 25 days . 
And like this magnificent origami , cells are developing at one million cells per second at four weeks , as it ' s just folding on itself . 
Within five weeks , you start to see the early atrium and the early ventricles . 
Six weeks , these folds are now beginning with the papilla on the inside of the heart actually being able to pull down each one of those valves in your heart until you get a mature heart -- and then basically the development of the entire human body . 
The magic of the mechanisms inside each genetic structure saying exactly where that nerve cell should go -- the complexity of these , the mathematical models of how these things are indeed done are beyond human comprehension . 
Even though I am a mathematician , I look at this with marvel of how do these instruction sets not make these mistakes as they build what is us ? 
It ' s a mystery , it ' s magic , it ' s divinity . 
Then you start to take a look at adult life . 
Take a look at this little tuft of capillaries . 
It ' s just a tiny sub-substructure , microscopic . 
But basically by the time you ' re nine months and you ' re given birth , you have almost 60,000 miles of vessels inside your body . 
And only one mile is visible . 
59,999 miles that are basically bringing nutrients and taking waste away . 
The complexity of building that within a single system is , again , beyond any comprehension or any existing mathematics today . 
And then instructions set , from the brain to every other part of the body -- look at the complexity of the folding . 
Where does this intelligence of knowing that a fold can actually hold more information , so as you actually watch the baby ' s brain grow . 
And this is one of the things we ' re doing . 
We ' re launching two new studies of scanning babies ' brains from the moment they ' re born . 
Every six months until they ' re six years old , we ' re going to be doing about 250 children , watching exactly how the gyri and the sulci of the brains fold to see how this magnificent development actually turns into memories and the marvel that is us . 
And it ' s not just our own existence , but how does the woman ' s body understand to have genetic structure that not only builds her own , but then has the understanding that allows her to become a walking immunological , cardiovascular system that basically is a mobile system that can actually nurture , treat this child with a kind of marvel that is beyond , again , our comprehension -- the magic that is existence , that is us ? 
So , I ' ll be speaking to you using language ... 
because I can . 
This is one these magical abilities that we humans have . 
We can transmit really complicated thoughts to one another . 
So what I ' m doing right now is , I ' m making sounds with my mouth as I ' m exhaling . 
I ' m making tones and hisses and puffs , and those are creating air vibrations in the air . 
Those air vibrations are traveling to you , they ' re hitting your eardrums , and then your brain takes those vibrations from your eardrums and transforms them into thoughts . 
I hope . 
( Laughter ) I hope that ' s happening . 
So because of this ability , we humans are able to transmit our ideas across vast reaches of space and time . 
We ' re able to transmit knowledge across minds . 
I can put a bizarre new idea in your mind right now . 
I could say , " Imagine a jellyfish waltzing in a library while thinking about quantum mechanics. " 
( Laughter ) Now , if everything has gone relatively well in your life so far , you probably haven ' t had that thought before . 
( Laughter ) But now I ' ve just made you think it , through language . 
Now of course , there isn ' t just one language in the world , there are about 7,000 languages spoken around the world . 
And all the languages differ from one another in all kinds of ways . 
Some languages have different sounds , they have different vocabularies , and they also have different structures -- very importantly , different structures . 
That begs the question : Does the language we speak shape the way we think ? 
Now , this is an ancient question . 
People have been speculating about this question forever . 
Charlemagne , Holy Roman emperor , said , " To have a second language is to have a second soul " -- strong statement that language crafts reality . 
But on the other hand , Shakespeare has Juliet say , " What ' s in a name ? 
A rose by any other name would smell as sweet. " 
Well , that suggests that maybe language doesn ' t craft reality . 
These arguments have gone back and forth for thousands of years . 
But until recently , there hasn ' t been any data to help us decide either way . 
Recently , in my lab and other labs around the world , we ' ve started doing research , and now we have actual scientific data to weigh in on this question . 
So let me tell you about some of my favorite examples . 
I ' ll start with an example from an Aboriginal community in Australia that I had the chance to work with . 
These are the Kuuk Thaayorre people . 
They live in Pormpuraaw at the very west edge of Cape York . 
What ' s cool about Kuuk Thaayorre is , in Kuuk Thaayorre , they don ' t use words like " left " and " right , " and instead , everything is in cardinal directions : north , south , east and west . 
And when I say everything , I really mean everything . 
You would say something like , " Oh , there ' s an ant on your southwest leg. " 
Or , " Move your cup to the north-northeast a little bit. " 
In fact , the way that you say " hello " in Kuuk Thaayorre is you say , " Which way are you going ? " 
And the answer should be , " North-northeast in the far distance . 
How about you ? " 
So imagine as you ' re walking around your day , every person you greet , you have to report your heading direction . 
( Laughter ) But that would actually get you oriented pretty fast , right ? 
Because you literally couldn ' t get past " hello , " if you didn ' t know which way you were going . 
In fact , people who speak languages like this stay oriented really well . 
They stay oriented better than we used to think humans could . 
We used to think that humans were worse than other creatures because of some biological excuse : " Oh , we don ' t have magnets in our beaks or in our scales. " 
No ; if your language and your culture trains you to do it , actually , you can do it . 
There are humans around the world who stay oriented really well . 
And just to get us in agreement about how different this is from the way we do it , I want you all to close your eyes for a second and point southeast . 
( Laughter ) Keep your eyes closed. Point . 
OK , so you can open your eyes . 
I see you guys pointing there , there , there , there , there ... 
I don ' t know which way it is myself -- ( Laughter ) You have not been a lot of help . 
( Laughter ) So let ' s just say the accuracy in this room was not very high . 
This is a big difference in cognitive ability across languages , right ? 
Where one group -- very distinguished group like you guys -- doesn ' t know which way is which , but in another group , I could ask a five-year-old and they would know . 
( Laughter ) There are also really big differences in how people think about time . 
So here I have pictures of my grandfather at different ages . 
And if I ask an English speaker to organize time , they might lay it out this way , from left to right . 
This has to do with writing direction . 
If you were a speaker of Hebrew or Arabic , you might do it going in the opposite direction , from right to left . 
But how would the Kuuk Thaayorre , this Aboriginal group I just told you about , do it ? 
They don ' t use words like " left " and " right. " 
Let me give you hint . 
When we sat people facing south , they organized time from left to right . 
When we sat them facing north , they organized time from right to left . 
When we sat them facing east , time came towards the body . 
What ' s the pattern ? 
East to west , right ? 
So for them , time doesn ' t actually get locked on the body at all , it gets locked on the landscape . 
So for me , if I ' m facing this way , then time goes this way , and if I ' m facing this way , then time goes this way . 
I ' m facing this way , time goes this way -- very egocentric of me to have the direction of time chase me around every time I turn my body . 
For the Kuuk Thaayorre , time is locked on the landscape . 
It ' s a dramatically different way of thinking about time . 
Here ' s another really smart human trick . 
Suppose I ask you how many penguins are there . 
Well , I bet I know how you ' d solve that problem if you solved it . 
You went , " One , two , three , four , five , six , seven , eight. " 
You counted them . 
You named each one with a number , and the last number you said was the number of penguins . 
This is a little trick that you ' re taught to use as kids . 
You learn the number list and you learn how to apply it . 
A little linguistic trick . 
Well , some languages don ' t do this , because some languages don ' t have exact number words . 
They ' re languages that don ' t have a word like " seven " or a word like " eight. " 
In fact , people who speak these languages don ' t count , and they have trouble keeping track of exact quantities . 
So , for example , if I ask you to match this number of penguins to the same number of ducks , you would be able to do that by counting . 
But folks who don ' t have that linguistic trick can ' t do that . 
Languages also differ in how they divide up the color spectrum -- the visual world . 
Some languages have lots of words for colors , some have only a couple words , " light " and " dark. " 
And languages differ in where they put boundaries between colors . 
So , for example , in English , there ' s a word for blue that covers all of the colors that you can see on the screen , but in Russian , there isn ' t a single word . 
Instead , Russian speakers have to differentiate between light blue , " goluboy , " and dark blue , " siniy. " 
So Russians have this lifetime of experience of , in language , distinguishing these two colors . 
When we test people ' s ability to perceptually discriminate these colors , what we find is that Russian speakers are faster across this linguistic boundary . 
They ' re faster to be able to tell the difference between a light and dark blue . 
And when you look at people ' s brains as they ' re looking at colors -- say you have colors shifting slowly from light to dark blue -- the brains of people who use different words for light and dark blue will give a surprised reaction as the colors shift from light to dark , as if , " Ooh , something has categorically changed , " whereas the brains of English speakers , for example , that don ' t make this categorical distinction , don ' t give that surprise , because nothing is categorically changing . 
Languages have all kinds of structural quirks . 
This is one of my favorites . 
Lots of languages have grammatical gender ; every noun gets assigned a gender , often masculine or feminine . 
And these genders differ across languages . 
So , for example , the sun is feminine in German but masculine in Spanish , and the moon , the reverse . 
Could this actually have any consequence for how people think ? 
Do German speakers think of the sun as somehow more female-like , and the moon somehow more male-like ? 
Actually , it turns out that ' s the case . 
So if you ask German and Spanish speakers to , say , describe a bridge , like the one here -- " bridge " happens to be grammatically feminine in German , grammatically masculine in Spanish -- German speakers are more likely to say bridges are " beautiful , " " elegant " and stereotypically feminine words . 
Whereas Spanish speakers will be more likely to say they ' re " strong " or " long , " these masculine words . 
( Laughter ) Languages also differ in how they describe events , right ? 
You take an event like this , an accident . 
In English , it ' s fine to say , " He broke the vase. " 
In a language like Spanish , you might be more likely to say , " The vase broke , " or , " The vase broke itself. " 
If it ' s an accident , you wouldn ' t say that someone did it . 
In English , quite weirdly , we can even say things like , " I broke my arm. " 
Now , in lots of languages , you couldn ' t use that construction unless you are a lunatic and you went out looking to break your arm -- ( Laughter ) and you succeeded . 
If it was an accident , you would use a different construction . 
Now , this has consequences . 
So , people who speak different languages will pay attention to different things , depending on what their language usually requires them to do . 
So we show the same accident to English speakers and Spanish speakers , English speakers will remember who did it , because English requires you to say , " He did it ; he broke the vase. " 
Whereas Spanish speakers might be less likely to remember who did it if it ' s an accident , but they ' re more likely to remember that it was an accident . 
They ' re more likely to remember the intention . 
So , two people watch the same event , witness the same crime , but end up remembering different things about that event . 
This has implications , of course , for eyewitness testimony . 
It also has implications for blame and punishment . 
So if you take English speakers and I just show you someone breaking a vase , and I say , " He broke the vase , " as opposed to " The vase broke , " even though you can witness it yourself , you can watch the video , you can watch the crime against the vase , you will punish someone more , you will blame someone more if I just said , " He broke it , " as opposed to , " It broke. " 
The language guides our reasoning about events . 
Now , I ' ve given you a few examples of how language can profoundly shape the way we think , and it does so in a variety of ways . 
So language can have big effects , like we saw with space and time , where people can lay out space and time in completely different coordinate frames from each other . 
Language can also have really deep effects -- that ' s what we saw with the case of number . 
Having count words in your language , having number words , opens up the whole world of mathematics . 
Of course , if you don ' t count , you can ' t do algebra , you can ' t do any of the things that would be required to build a room like this or make this broadcast , right ? 
This little trick of number words gives you a stepping stone into a whole cognitive realm . 
Language can also have really early effects , what we saw in the case of color . 
These are really simple , basic , perceptual decisions . 
We make thousands of them all the time , and yet , language is getting in there and fussing even with these tiny little perceptual decisions that we make . 
Language can have really broad effects . 
So the case of grammatical gender may be a little silly , but at the same time , grammatical gender applies to all nouns . 
That means language can shape how you ' re thinking about anything that can be named by a noun . 
That ' s a lot of stuff . 
And finally , I gave you an example of how language can shape things that have personal weight to us -- ideas like blame and punishment or eyewitness memory . 
These are important things in our daily lives . 
Now , the beauty of linguistic diversity is that it reveals to us just how ingenious and how flexible the human mind is . 
Human minds have invented not one cognitive universe , but 7,000 -- there are 7,000 languages spoken around the world . 
And we can create many more -- languages , of course , are living things , things that we can hone and change to suit our needs . 
The tragic thing is that we ' re losing so much of this linguistic diversity all the time . 
We ' re losing about one language a week , and by some estimates , half of the world ' s languages will be gone in the next hundred years . 
And the even worse news is that right now , almost everything we know about the human mind and human brain is based on studies of usually American English-speaking undergraduates at universities . 
That excludes almost all humans. Right ? 
So what we know about the human mind is actually incredibly narrow and biased , and our science has to do better . 
I want to leave you with this final thought . 
I ' ve told you about how speakers of different languages think differently , but of course , that ' s not about how people elsewhere think . 
It ' s about how you think . 
It ' s how the language that you speak shapes the way that you think . 
And that gives you the opportunity to ask , " Why do I think the way that I do ? " 
" How could I think differently ? " 
And also , " What thoughts do I wish to create ? " 
Have you ever wanted to stay young a little longer and put off aging ? 
This is a dream of the ages . 
But scientists have for a long time thought this just was never going to be possible . 
They thought you just wear out , there ' s nothing you can do about it -- kind of like an old shoe . 
But if you look in nature , you see that different kinds of animals can have really different lifespans . 
Now these animals are different from one another , because they have different genes . 
So that suggests that somewhere in these genes , somewhere in the DNA , are genes for aging , genes that allow them to have different lifespans . 
So if there are genes like that , then you can imagine that , if you could change one of the genes in an experiment , an aging gene , maybe you could slow down aging and extend lifespan . 
And if you could do that , then you could find the genes for aging . 
And if they exist and you can find them , then maybe one could eventually do something about it . 
So we ' ve set out to look for genes that control aging . 
And we didn ' t study any of these animals . 
Instead , we studied a little , tiny , round worm called C. elegans , which is just about the size of a comma in a sentence . 
And we were really optimistic that we could find something because there had been a report of a long-lived mutant . 
So we started to change genes at random , looking for long-lived animals . 
And we were very lucky to find that mutations that damage one single gene called daf-2 doubled the lifespan of the little worm . 
So you can see in black , after a month -- they ' re very short-lived ; that ' s why we like to study them for studies of aging -- in black , after a month , the normal worms are all dead . 
But at that time , most of the mutant worms are still alive . 
And it isn ' t until twice as long that they ' re all dead . 
